1
 Abstract— The digitisation of supply chain management 
lies at the crux of modern industry and similar trends are 
noticeable in the cold chain (CC) under the cold chain 4.0 
(CC 4.0) concept. However, the extant research lacks a 
systematic summary of existing findings on CC 4.0. 
Therefore, this study provides a bibliometric and network 
analysis of 618 high-quality CC 4.0 publications extracted 
from the Web of Science (WoS). The study uses 
performance assessment and science mapping to investigate 
the impact of digital and sustainable technologies in the CC 
domain. Four main research streams and 19 research 
propositions are identified to provide an informative 
overview of the most recent developments in the emerging 
and growing domain of CC 4.0 and the interface between 
information systems and operations management. The 
study further identifies the critical role and impacts of 
digital-sustainable transformation and presents an agenda 
for future research focusing on critical theoretical and 
managerial areas that remain understudied. 
 
Index Terms— Cold supply chain management; digital 
transformation; Industry 4.0; logistics; perishable products; 
pharmaceutical cold chain; sustainability management 
 
I. INTRODUCTION 
HE cold chain (CC) has significantly contributed to curbing 
perishable product waste [1][2], but numerous challenges 
threaten its overall sustainable performance. These include high 
energy consumption, carbon emissions, contamination, product 
deterioration due to temperature mismanagement, high costs, 
ineffective collaboration and coordination between partners, 
lack of real-time data sharing, labelling, packaging, and 
traceability errors [3]. Additionally, CC accounts for 30% of the 
global energy consumption [4] and 1% of global greenhouse 
gas emissions [5].  
To this end, Industry 4.0 could offer promising solutions as it 
integrates networking, computation, and physical processes, 
while including a wide array of technologies, such as 
blockchain, cloud computing, mobile devices, radio-frequency 
 
Shashi is with the Indian Institute of Management, Sirmaur, 173025, 
Himachal 
Pradesh, 
India 
(e-mail: 
shashikashav@iimsirmaur.ac.in; 
shashikashav37@gmail.com).  
Myriam Ertz is with the LaboNFC, Department of Economics and 
Administrative Sciences, Université du Québec à Chicoutimi, Chicoutimi, 
Quebec, Canada (e-mail: Myriam_Ertz@uqac.ca)   
identification (RFID), Internet of Things (IoT), robotics, big 
data, cyber security, machine learning, augmented reality, 
artificial intelligence (AI), smart sensors, and additive 
manufacturing [6][7][8][9]. The term Logistics 4.0 has been 
coined to refer to ‘the specific applications of Industry 4.0 in 
the era of logistics and was created as an integral part of the 
Industry 4.0 concept’ [10]. In the CC area, this technological 
shift could improve traceability capabilities, temperature 
management, and thus sustainability through value chain 
optimisation, 
cost 
reduction, 
energy 
saving, 
resource 
conservation, and health risk reduction [11][12]. 
The promising features of cold chain 4.0 (CC 4.0) make this 
research area burgeoning. Theories and practices about CC 4.0 
have enhanced the overall understanding of the research field. 
Systematic reviews and empirical and conceptual studies have 
also been conducted. For instance, Ding [13] studied the 
barriers to sustainability of CC and how Industry 4.0 could be 
implemented in the sustainable CC context. Furthermore, 
Badia-Melis et al. [14] demonstrated the advantages and 
disadvantages of CC 4.0 for traceability purposes. Some 
researchers have investigated the role of smart packaging [15] 
and RFID [16][17][18][19]. Some scholars have developed 
traceability models using RFID and IoT sensor technology [20], 
or RFID and the Electronic Product Code (EPC) Network 
[21][22][23], while others have reviewed the opportunities and 
challenges of integrating sensing data into decision support 
systems [24] and electronic data interchange (EDI) [25]. 
Bottani et al. [26] evaluated the environmental sustainability of 
RFID technology using a life cycle assessment methodology. 
Despite the promising developments in CC 4.0, the research 
area lacks a holistic summary of its advancements and trends. 
Previous studies have advanced CC 4.0 knowledge by 
mobilising various disciplines, viewpoints, and research 
patterns. Nevertheless, the extant literature is not adequately 
theorised and the diversity of the methods used remains unclear. 
Currently, no study has combined both qualitative and 
quantitative approaches to link the influential contributions of 
CC 4.0. In addition, the CC 4.0 scholarship is fragmented into 
several sub-disciplines, leading to the absence of a coherent 
perspective of the domain. This is challenging because it 
Piera Centobelli is with the Department of Industrial Engineering, 
University 
of 
Naples 
Federico 
II, 
80125 
Naples, 
Italy 
(e-mail: 
piera.centobelli@unina.it).  
Roberto Cerchione is with the Department of Engineering, University of 
Naples Parthenope, Centro Direzionale di Napoli, 80143 Naples, Italy (e-mail: 
roberto.cerchione@uniparthenope.it). 
  
Shaping the Future of Cold Chain 4.0 Through 
the Lenses of Digital Transition and 
Sustainability 
Shashi, Myriam Ertz, Piera Centobelli, and Roberto Cerchione 
T

 
2
hinders multiple stakeholders from thoroughly appraising the 
complex CC 4.0 domain, identifying suitable solutions for 
significant problems, and finding relevant theoretical and 
applied solutions.  
With the exponential growth of the literature, bibliometric 
and network analyses have emerged as valuable alternatives to 
systematic literature reviews for evaluating the current status 
and identifying emerging and established research areas 
[2][27]. Moreover, such analyses inform stakeholders about the 
state of a research field in terms of journals, authors, countries, 
relevant topics, and research areas. In addition, such analyses 
yield clusters of influential authors and publications to 
comprehend the dynamics of a specific research stream and its 
corresponding knowledge base [28]. Finally, past research has 
highlighted the importance of mapping and organising prior 
research on a rapidly developing research domain to understand 
its trends and implications for scholars and practitioners. Both 
bibliometrics and network analysis may contribute to this 
objective in CC 4.0. Hence, this study intends to fill the research 
gaps mentioned above, specifically those related to the absence 
of a broad outline of CC 4.0, by employing a robust analytical 
approach and providing thematic quantitative and qualitative 
insights of CC 4.0 research through bibliometrics and network 
analysis.  
Accordingly, the study contributes significantly to the 
current knowledge on CC 4.0 because it: (1) provides a 
structured summary of CC 4.0 research; (2) highlights temporal 
trends in publications, most active and influential papers, 
journals, research institutions, countries, most prolific and cited 
authors, and most commonly used terms; (3) uncovers the 
research scopes, methodologies, and empirical concerns 
covered by extant research; (4) discovers impacts, explores 
themes and topics, and develops fundamental relationships 
between them through citation information; and (5) underlines 
key outcomes from past research to pinpoint new research 
opportunities and propose an agenda for future research. While 
conventional reviews are based on 50–150 articles, this study 
extends beyond by using the Web of Science Core Collection.  
II. METHODOLOGY 
A. Bibliometrics and Co-citation Analysis 
Bibliometrics is a set of mathematical and statistical methods 
employed to critically study and assess the evolution of past 
studies in a specific research domain [29]. This methodology is 
instrumental in examining a research topic's structure, 
characteristics, and patterns [30]. Additionally, it outlines 
future research avenues and guides scholars in bridging the 
existing research gaps. The methodology draws on a rich corpus 
of tools and perspectives from library and information sciences 
to assess past research developments on a given topic and 
across various disciplines [31]. We employed the widely 
recommended research methods for bibliometric and network-
based review research as defined by Merigó et al. [31] and 
Shashi et al. [2]. Bibliometrics mainly includes a performance 
assessment and science-mapping approach. 
The performance assessment approach grasps the dynamic 
characteristics of past publications, namely year-wise research 
progress; the geographical distribution of research; top 
publishing and citing journals, institutions, and countries; 
leading prolific and impactful scholars; and the most frequent 
keywords in the research field. Furthermore, it counts the 
citations of specific articles to highlight their comparative role 
in the growth of the research field. Moreover, the science-
mapping approach includes co-citation analysis to explore 
hidden research patterns. Co-citation analysis may illustrate the 
similarity of content and therefore assist in uncovering clusters 
of research areas and scholars and how and to what extent they 
may be related to each other [2], thus facilitating the proposition 
of a theory-based agenda for future research [3]. 
B. Material Collection and Selection 
In this study, the Web of Science (WoS) repository was used 
to extract high-quality bibliographic records on CC 4.0. WoS is 
primarily a quality-oriented repository, followed by Scopus and 
Google Scholar [32]. It comprises extensive coverage of 
citations and bibliographic records from various research 
disciplines. WoS consists of multidisciplinary citation 
information from approximately 80,000 books, 18,000 high-
impact journals, 180,000 conference proceedings, and more 
than one billion cited references. The comparative advantage of 
WoS over other datasets is greater consistency and 
standardisation in recording publications [33]. Although 
Scopus and Google Scholar include more publication outlets 
than WoS, they are less influential [34]. 
Additionally, the publication outlets in the Thomson Reuters 
WoS have impact factor values in the Journal Citation Reports 
(JCR). Furthermore, researchers (e.g. [2]) have claimed that 
employing a single database avoids the homogenisation bias of 
using different databases for bibliometric studies. Finally, this 
study performs a co-citation analysis by utilising the reference 
lists of sample articles to identify other relevant scholar 
communities and literature that might have been overlooked in 
conventional literature reviews [2]. Consequently, we also 
identified, studied, and reviewed additional articles not 
included in WoS, but available in different databases (e.g. 
Scopus, K-Hub, EBSCO, and ProQuest). We relied primarily 
on WoS and extended our search to other databases based on 
this premise.  
A string of keywords and boolean operators (‘Industr* 4.0’ 
OR ‘Smart’ OR ‘Integrated industr*’ OR ‘Connected industry’ 
OR ‘Industrial internet’ OR ‘Internet plus’ OR ‘Internet of 
things’ OR ‘IoT’ OR ‘Internet of Services’ OR ‘Cyber-physical 
system’ OR ‘RFID’ OR ‘Senso*’ OR ‘Machine-to-machine 
communication’ OR ‘Mensch-Maschine-Interaktion’ OR ‘Big 
data’ OR ‘Radio-frequency identification’ OR ‘Cyber-physical 
system*’ OR ‘Cognitive computing’ OR ‘Radio Frequency 
Identification’ OR ‘Cloud computing’ OR ‘Advance analytics’ 
OR ‘Artificial intelligence’) AND (‘perishable’ OR ‘cold’ OR 
‘refrigerated’ OR ‘fresh’ OR ‘frozen ‘ OR ‘temperature’) AND 
(‘supply chain*’ OR ‘logistics’) was used to retrieve records 
from the WoS database, searching these keywords in the title, 
abstract, or keywords. The asterisk indicates plural terms or 
values for any number of characters. We restricted our literature 

 
3
search to 1991–2020. The rationale is that WoS yielded no 
publication on the CC 4.0 domain before 1991 [35]. 
Subsequently, we considered only papers written in English and 
peer-reviewed full-length articles and reviews, excluding other 
types of articles (e.g. early access, book chapters, editorial 
notes, conference proceedings, books, technical notes, 
professional reports, and articles). Consequently, we selected 
627 sample articles in August 2020. Further, we manually 
checked the sample and retracted nine articles as they were 
found irrelevant. Meanwhile, articles from England, Scotland, 
Wales, and Northern Ireland were reclassified under the United 
Kingdom (UK). The final sample selected for further analysis 
comprised 618 articles published by 2,028 authors affiliated 
with 671 institutions in 63 countries and published in 438 
sources, citing 14,895 references. 
Fig. 1 shows the methodological classification of the 618 
sample articles. There were 230 experiments, 165 literature 
reviews, 77 conceptual studies, 44 mathematical modelling 
studies, 32 survey-based studies, 32 case studies, 26 mixed-
methodology approaches, and 12 interview-based studies. 
III. PERFORMANCE ASSESSMENT 
Since the beginning of the 21st century, the academic 
productivity of global CC 4.0 research has grown significantly. 
Fig. 2 presents the extent of literature published on CC 4.0 
between 1991 and August 2020. The analysis of the sample 
indicated a growing research interest, especially in the last eight 
years, since 2014. The most fruitful year was 2017 with 84 
topical articles. The growth in the number of publications 
occurred in three stages. The first stage spanned from 1991 to 
2006, when topical research was burgeoning. During these 16 
years, 28 articles were published, representing only 4.50% of 
the total sample. 
However, no papers were published between 1992 and 1996. 
In the second stage, during 2007–2014, the research grew 
moderately. Consequently, 180 articles were published, 
representing 29.12% of the total sample. Lastly, a sharp 
increase in academic interest was observed during the third 
stage, ranging from 2015 to August 2020, with 410 articles 
(66.34%) being published. 
This exponential growth suggests that the causes and 
consequences of massive perishable product waste have 
become a rising topic of interest, explored from multiple 
disciplines and perspectives, especially emphasising how 
technology (4.0) can solve this issue. Based on the preliminary 
results, it is expected that this research area will continue to 
attract unabated growth in the following years, as it is yet to 
penetrate the maturity stage. 
A. Influential regions, authors, and institutions 
Analysing authors’ countries and regions of origin can 
provide insights into the growth of research centres, research 
groups, and schools of thought. Countries or regions affected 
by or reliant on CC 4.0 may be particularly interested in studies 
at the regional or national levels. In addition, institutions and 
individual authors publishing on this topic play a role in 
developing connections between research interests and 
disciplines. Thus, CC 4.0 is a cross-disciplinary subject, and in 
the following sections, we investigate which disciplines have 
contributed the most to its recent growth. 
1) Performance of countries and regions 
From a geographic perspective, it can be found that 618 
articles on CC 4.0 originate from 63 countries, belonging to 
four () continents. There was a greater geographic breadth of 
scientific publications, as the 20 most productive countries were 
responsible for 88.18% of the world’s total literature. China's 
contribution (154 articles) outperforms that of other countries, 
followed by the United States (77 articles). China’s first place 
can be related to the series of food and drug adulteration 
incidents (i.e. making something inferior in quality by adding 
another substance) that occurred in China, prompting the 
Chinese government and industries to focus on CC digitisation 
[36]. Recently, 52 traceability system regulations and laws have 
been introduced in China [37]. While China and India are the 
world’s most populated countries and the safety of perishable 
products is of utmost importance, there is a vast difference in 
research focus. China accounts for 24.91% of the total CC 4.0 
research, while India’s contribution is 3.55%. This may be due 
to India's persistent challenges in modern technology adoption 
compared with China [38]. The United States published half the 
volume of papers published by China but has emerged as the 
most impactful, with 857 citations. Similarly, Italy published 
approximately four times fewer papers than China, but its 
impact (788 citations) was higher than that of China (749 
citations). 
2) Performance of authors 
An Academic scholars’ publication quantity indicates their 
strength and effectiveness in their research work. Thus, a 
scholar's total number of articles is considered one of the key 
performance indicators for mapping the scholar’s influence in 
the domain [39]. A total of 2,028 scholars have published 618 
articles. Of these 2028 scholars, 89.54% have authored/co-
authored one article on the topic. This indicates that CC 4.0 is 
an area of expertise for a few scholars. Y.P. Tsang from Hong 
Kong Polytechnic University (Hong Kong) has the most 
significant number of articles (six), followed by Reiner 
Jedermann (University of Bremen), and Ricardo Badia-Melis 
(Universidad Politécnica de Madrid).  
Concerning the impact of 3 prolific authors, Reiner 
Jedermann’s CC 4.0 work has attained prominent citations (199 
citations), followed by Ricardo Badia-Melis (181 citations), and 
Luis Ruiz-Garcia (142 citations). In addition, these three 
authors attained the highest average number of citations per 
article. Based on these results, it can be concluded that these 
authors have contributed significantly to the development of the 
CC 4.0 domain. 
3) Performance of institutions 
Articles published by authors affiliated with different 
institutions worldwide were analysed to identify the most 
influential institutions in the CC 4.0 field. In total, authors from 
671 institutions have published articles in the sample. Among 
them, 84.14% of the institutions published only a single article. 
The top 15 institutions accounted for 126 articles (20.38% of 
the total sample). China Agricultural University appeared to 

 
4
dominate the CC 4.0 domain. In this line, it produced the 
highest number (28) of published articles, followed by Hong 
Kong Polytechnic University (Hong Kong) and the University 
of Bremen (Germany), both having published 10 articles each. 
Subsequently, we analysed institutions that enjoyed the 
highest impact by citations. Consistently, China Agricultural 
University emerged as the most impactful institution with 308 
citations, followed by Wageningen University and Research 
Center (Netherlands) and the University of Sheffield (United 
Kingdom) with 283 and 271 citations, respectively. For average 
citations per article, the University of Sheffield is the most 
impactful with 135.5 average citations per article, followed by 
EmpowerTech Inc. (United States), RFID European Lab 
(France), and Technical University of Munich (Germany) with 
49.00, 47.50, and 42.25 average citations per article, 
respectively.  
B. Performance of journals 
We further analysed the leading journals that published 
research on CC 4.0. A total of 618 articles appeared from 438 
different sources, indicating an average of 1.41 articles per 
journal. Most journals are engineering- or technology-based 
research journals. Fifteen journals published 119 sample 
articles representing 19.25% of the overall published literature. 
The journal Trends in Food Science & Technology paid early 
attention to this field. Computers and Electronics in Agriculture 
(15 articles) published the most articles, followed by Food 
Control (14 articles), and achieved continuous progress in 
recent years. Similarly, Sensors, Journal of Food Engineering, 
International Journal of Production Economics, and Applied 
Sciences are other leading journals with 10, 9, 8, and 8 articles, 
respectively. The year-wise publication growth pattern 
highlights that these journals started paying attention to CC 4.0 
in 2007.  
Next, we summarise the most impactful journals in terms of 
average citations and total citations per article to evaluate their 
influence. We considered only journals with at least two 
published articles for this ranking. For authors, this analysis 
highlights that leading journals in terms of the number of 
articles published are not necessarily the most impactful ones. 
In addition, articles published in these 438 journals were cited 
4,124 times. This high number hints at the multidisciplinary 
nature of safety culture research and the wide variety of 
research themes. Regarding citations, Food Control is the most 
impactful journal with 363 citations, followed by Renewable & 
Sustainable Energy Reviews (272 citations), Philosophical 
Transactions of the Royal Society A-Mathematical Physical and 
Engineering Sciences (218 citations), Journal of Food 
Engineering (191 citations), and Computers and Electronics in 
Agriculture (181 citations). Concerning the average citations 
per article, Renewable & Sustainable Energy Reviews is the 
most impactful journal with 136.00 average citations per article, 
followed by European Journal of Operational Research (43.50 
citations per article), Food and Bioprocess Technology (38.00 
citations per article), and Philosophical Transactions of the 
Royal Society A-Mathematical Physical and Engineering 
Sciences (36.33 citations per article). This analysis shows that 
this field is a multidisciplinary research area distributed across 
various journals and covers diverse research domains. 
However, journals publishing CC 4.0 literature relate primarily 
to engineering, computer sciences, agricultural, and biological 
sciences. 
C. Citations performance of articles 
It is generally assumed that citations show an article’s 
influence and impact and, hence, its quality. Therefore, the 
higher the citations of an article, the greater its impact and 
contribution towards developing the body of knowledge [2]. In 
this context, evaluation of citation performance of articles 
enables identifying the most impactful articles that have 
contributed the most to field enrichment. In total, 618 sample 
articles were cited 4,124 times. The 30 most-cited CC 4.0 
articles have been cited 1,771 times, representing 42.94% of all 
citations. The article entitled ‘Recycling of WEEEs: An 
economic assessment of present and future e-waste streams’ 
[40] appeared to be the most impactful, with 261 citations in 
WoS. Interestingly, among these 30 top-cited articles, none was 
published before 2012. This means that CC 4.0 papers 
published in the last eight years are more impactful than articles 
published before 2012. Furthermore, the results reveal that at 
least two researchers co-authored all of the most cited articles. 
The higher numbers of co-authored articles indicate a stronger 
association between scholars within similar fields and more 
significant opportunities for future collaboration.  
D. Keywords analysis 
Keyword analysis was performed to explore the prevalent 
themes in the CC 4.0 literature. This study reveals important 
research subfields and identifies trending topics in scientific 
research. This assessment further establishes inferences 
regarding research priorities. A pool of 2,303 keywords was 
identified in the sample. This larger pool was substantially 
reduced by establishing an occurrence frequency threshold at a 
minimum of 5. In total, 106 keywords were identified. We 
classified the keywords into two themes: general and 
technology based. A panel of five leading CC researchers and 
five CC managers was appointed for this classification. A list 
of keywords was given to the panel and it was requested to 
classify the highly-cited keywords. The panel evaluated the 
scope of each keyword and classified them into two groups: 
general and technology based. Table 1 lists the 10 most 
frequently cited keywords for both themes. Notably, the 
cumulative occurrence frequency of general keywords (568) 
was relatively higher than that of technology-based keywords 
(343). 

 
5
 
IV. SCIENCE MAPPING 
Next, science mapping was performed. It demonstrates the 
intellectual connections within the changing landscape of the 
scientific knowledge system. This mapping depends on graph 
theory to explore the data structure [41]. In the academic 
literature, different approaches are available to develop 
intellectual connections. For instance, it is possible to draw the 
network structures of authors, journals, countries, institutions, 
and articles. However, researchers have advocated co-citations 
of article references and authors as the most imperative 
structures [42]. Co-citation measures the correlation between 
two articles that address similar subject areas [42]. It facilitates 
the exploration of existing research topics discussed in previous 
years and enables future research avenues. Co-citation 
visualisation can help to understand tie strength within the 
entire network and how a specific citation is positioned within 
the field [43]. The network comprises edges and nodes. Each 
node represents an article. The thickness of the edge between 
the two nodes represents their co-citation frequency. Thicker 
edges indicate a higher co-citation frequency for any pair of 
articles. Node size represents the total number of citations 
received by the article. 
This study performed a co-citation analysis of references and 
authors. We employed VOSviewer, a text-mining tool based on 
the VOS algorithm, which visually depicts similarities between 
given objects (i.e. citations) [44]. VOSviewer aims ‘to provide 
a low-dimensional visualisation in which objects are located so 
that the distance between any pair of objects reflects their 
similarity as accurately as possible’ [44]. The distance between 
two nodes indicates their relatedness [28]. Furthermore, we 
thoroughly analysed the co-cited articles and authors. 
A. Co-cited authors and co-citation analysis 
This section presents the most co-cited authors from a sample 
of 618 articles. In this line, 11,324 cited authors were identified. 
To improve the network presentation, we lowered the number 
of authors by applying a minimum of 15 citations. This resulted 
in the identification of 53 most co-cited authors. Subsequently, 
as group authors, we performed network analysis according to 
similar research interests [2]. Fig. 3 shows the three clusters, 
and Table 2 provides detailed information. The results 
confirmed ‘Jedermann R and ‘Ruiz-Garcia I’ (108 co-citations) 
as the most co-cited authors, followed by ‘Jedermann R’ and 
‘Gurbbstrom, RW’ (88 co-citations); ‘Jedermann R’ and 
‘Defraeye T’ (76 co-citations); and ‘Jedermann R’ and ‘Badia-
Melis R’ (69 co-citations). Fig. 3 shows three clusters of three 
different colours. Each node refers to an author and the node 
size represents the number of citations. The edge thickness 
between the two nodes reflects their degree of sharing similar 
characteristics. There were a few leading CC 4.0 authors within 
each retrieved cluster. These authors are responsible for the 
substantial development of CC 4.0.  
For instance, in Cluster 1 (red), Abad specialises in RFID 
smart tags for traceability and CC monitoring. Atzori advances 
knowledge about the use of IoT. Aung is another impactful 
author who has contributed significantly to developing a deep 
understanding of effective temperature management through an 
accurate traceability system to reduce unsafe product 
production and distribution. Regattieri’s work highlights the 
legal and regulatory standpoints of traceability and a system of 
closed-loop traceability that supports decisions pertaining to 
CC logistics. Badia-Melis’s research summarises a few 
imperative topics, such as advanced trends in CC monitoring, 
the dynamic behaviour of CC 4.0 technologies and their effect 
on temperature management, and how CC 4.0 systems can win 
customers’ confidence by providing clear-cut information 
about product quality and safety. Costa’s work revolves around 
barriers and opportunities for the broader adoption of RFID. 
Kang specialises in RFID sensor-tag-based CC simulation 
models. Ruiz-Garcia investigated technologies for perishable 
products supply chain (SC), while Verdouw explored virtual 
SCs through IoT for reliable information systems. Finally, 
Xiao’s contribution is toward enhancing the traceability and 
transparency of CC logistics through wireless sensor networks 
(WSN).  
Within Cluster 2 (green), Akyildiz’s research revolves 
around the WSN for transmitting sensor data. Giannakourou’s 
work focuses on shelf-life extension and improvement, and the 
application of shelf-life decision support systems. Both Heising 
and Yam’s contributions clarify opportunities for intelligent 
packaging to enhance product quality. Kerry extended the 
literature on new packaging technologies, materials, and 
formats, and the processing of raw products to curb waste rates. 
Further, other researchers specialise in challenges and 
perspectives on advanced processing, distribution, and storage 
technologies 
and 
the 
application 
of 
time-temperature 
integrators to monitor product quality (e.g. Koutsoumanis and 
Rabb). Kumar’s research focused on third-party logistics 
selection for CC management. Kuswandi’s work covered 
nanotechnology and sensor trends in product packaging. 
Labuza’s contribution highlights incorrect handling, improper 
storage, and transport conditions under the CC. The 
contributions of Tsironi and Taoukis correspond to CC database 
development and its application, training for shelf-life testing, 
validation of time-temperature labels, and quality/safety 
assurance systems. 
The impactful authors in Cluster 3 (blue) are Jedermann, who 
specialises in intelligent food logistics, and Nunes, who 
specialises in improving logistics quality. Kader’s research 
summarises CC policies, product presentation, quality, and 
smart packaging. Defraeye specialises in CC performance 
measurement and virtual CC to assess cooling heterogeneity, 
package designs, and trade-offs between maintaining product 
quality and minimising environmental impact. Hertog’s 
expertise is in shelf-life modelling for predicting product 
quality and atmosphere packaging. Grubbstrom’s contribution 
to inventory management. Dabbene highlighted traceability 
issues in CC, traceability methods, and optimisation of CC in 
uncertain environments. Research in this cluster further 
addresses perishable product waste at different SC levels and 
related causes (e.g. Gustavsson and FAO).  

 
6
B. Co-citations analysis of co-cited articles 
In the 618-article sample, 14,895 citations were identified. 
Choosing a proper threshold level is always challenging 
because a low value will result in a highly crowded network 
visualisation, whereas a high number could lead to superficial 
results. Articles with at least nine citations were selected, 
resulting in the 62 most co-cited articles. Further, co-citation 
analysis was applied, and Fig. 3 shows the corresponding co-
citation network. Fig. 4 further presents the network of the most 
co-cited CC 4.0 articles, and the associated in-depth details are 
provided in Table 3. Fig. 4 highlights the four clusters with 
diverse colours: red, green, blue, and yellow. In addition, it 
shows how the most commonly cited articles are linked within 
a similar cluster. The node size indicates the citation frequency 
of an article. Consequently, the structure facilitates underlining 
the core articles within each cluster, which further assists in 
defining the cluster features.  
Cluster 1 (red) specialises in temperature monitoring using 
Industry 4.0. Amador et al. [45] examined the utilisation of 
RFID in mapping temperature through a comparative analysis 
of RFID temperature-tag performance with traditional 
temperature-mapping techniques and their use in CC. Aung and 
Chang [47] analysed methods to determine an optimal 
temperature range for multi-commodity cold storage and found 
WSN to be superior to traditional methods. Badia-Melis et al. 
[48] investigated the dynamic behaviour of RFID and WSN 
while 
describing 
how 
they 
affect 
the 
temperature 
measurements. 
 

 
7
Badia-Melis et al. [49] supported the role of WSN and RFID 
in recording product-specific history (e.g. the location and 
presence of certain gases, temperature, and humidity) and 
providing product location, which strengthens the chain of 
information. Research under this cluster also introduced 2G-
RFID-Sys, a system that combines IoT technology with RFID 
sensor tags to evaluate the temperature in an intelligent CC [50]. 
Similarly, researchers have developed CC predictor software 
for effective CC improvement and management [51]. 
Furthermore, Gubbi et al. [52] proposed a cloud-centric vision 
for IoT implementation worldwide. Hong et al. [53] explored 
the financial viability of business models by applying RFID 
technology to a CC traceability system. Kang et al. [54] 
designed an RFID sensor tag-based CC simulation model. Kim 
et al. [55] introduced the idea of quality measurement entitled 
‘Freshness Gauge’ and developed an algorithm to set the 
optimal temperature and humidity by highlighting product 
quality changes. Kuo and Chen [56] presented a CC logistics 
service framework that considers advancements in multiple 
temperature joint distribution systems. Qi et al. [57] illustrated 
a WSN-based CC as a decision support system for shelf-life 
prediction in a CC management framework. Ruiz-Garcia et al. 
[58][59] studied the ability of WSN to evaluate the transport 
conditions and cold storage. Thakur and Forås [60] reviewed 
the process of an online system based on the EPCIS to evaluate 
the time temperature and record traceability. Verdouw et al. 
[61] examined the virtual SC concept from the viewpoint of IoT 
and introduced an architecture to implement enabling 
information systems. Wang et al. [62] drew on a ZigBee-
standard WSN to develop a real-time CC-monitoring system. 
Xiao et al. [63] used a WSN integrated with compressed 
sending to establish a temperature monitoring system for 
chilled and frozen aquatic products. The objective of this 
technological arrangement is to improve the efficiency of the 
temperature-monitoring system. 
Cluster 2 (green) focuses on product quality and shelf life 
prediction. Grunow and Piramuthu [64] studied product-level 
information generated through RFID from retailer, distributor, 
and consumer perspectives, emphasising the remaining shelf 
life and expiry date. In addition, this study focuses on RFID 
investment decisions. Gustavsson et al. [65] stress that 
investments are required in the infrastructure, transportation, 
and packaging industries. Heising et al. [66] reviewed the 
opportunities for intelligent packaging to map the quality of 
perishable packed items. In this cluster, research has also 
emphasised shelf-life modelling for predicting quality changes 
and remaining shelf life to implement the first-expired-first-out 
CC approach for warehouse management [67]. Research has 
also highlighted the unavoidable role of intelligent food 
logistics. In this context, miniaturised RFID temperature 
loggers can be employed to examine the extent of local 
deviations, capture temperature gradients, and predict the 
number of sensors required for reliable mapping inside trucks 
or containers [68][69]. Meanwhile, Jedermann et al. [70] looked 
for a potential solution to technical challenges that still hamper 
the realistic implementation of WSNs in transport supervision. 
Laguerre et al. [71] presented a combined deterministic and 
stochastic model to measure the early product characteristics 
and operating conditions. Lang et al. [72] discussed a cognitive 
system based on an intelligent container to record quality losses 
due to temperature, control sensor density, and identify 
malfunctioning sensors. Furthermore, a structured model to 
detect optimal managerial practices to minimise CC logistics 
costs was proposed by Montanari [73]. Nunes et al. [74] 
claimed that shelf-life forecasting should not rely on individual 
quality factors. The quality characteristics that limit shelf life 
may vary depending on the temperature history. In the context 
of international transport, Rodríguez-Bermejo et al. [76] 
conducted a thermal study of a container to determine its 
temperature distribution. Rong et al. [77] developed a mixed-
integer linear programming model in which they integrated 
product quality and cost parameters to design and operate CC 
distribution systems. Ruiz-Garcia et al. [78] reviewed WSN 
benchmarks and wireless communication technologies in the 
agri-food sector. Finally, Wang and Li [79] proposed a dynamic 
product quality assessment framework for CC to reduce product 
spoilage and improve retailer profits. 
The intelligent packaging theme in cluster 3 (blue) was the 
most prevalent. Yam et al. [95] and Vanderroost et al. [94] 
defined intelligent packaging based on the packaging functions. 
Furthermore, they reviewed the current developments in 
intelligent packaging devices (e.g. RFID tags, barcode labels, 
gas indicators, biosensors, and time‐temperature indicators). 
Taoukis and Labuza [93] studied the most important types of 
commercial time-temperature indicators. Papetti et al. [92] 
integrated an electronic tracking system with a non-destructive 
quality analysis system. Pacquit et al. [91] designed a 
colorimetric dye-based indicator to efficiently capture the 
increase in volatile amines as a fish-spoilage indicator. Bibi et 
al. [81] claimed that RFID tags provide wireless systems for 
evaluating food packages through tag reads, fostering 
traceability, while offering instantaneous information about 
stock rotation and tracking. Costa et al. [82] discussed the 
opportunities and drawbacks of broader RFID adoption. 
Similarly, Ghaani et al. [84] described both the technical and 
commercial implementation of intelligent packaging, and 
pointed out the aspects restricting the full harnessing of 
intelligent packaging in the food industry. Kumar et al. [89] 
defined the key concepts and terms, working principles, and 
components associated with the RFID system in CC. They 
discussed various challenges related to its implementation (e.g. 
reading accuracy, security concerns, recycling issues, reading 
range, cost, non-uniform standards, and privacy). Kerry et al. 
[87] examined the potential of RFID, sensor technologies, and 
indicators (e.g. time–temperature, freshness, and integrity 
indicators) to be used in CC products, and underlined the 
benefits of packaging technologies that are active and 
intelligent. 
Cluster 4 (yellow) focused on real-time traceability. Abad et 
al. [97] built and validated RFID smart tags for monitoring and 
real-time traceability of CC applications. Aung and Chang [99] 
provided detailed information on traceability from the 

 
8
viewpoint of product safety and quality. Angeles [98] discussed 
RFID technologies and their application in SC, and underlined 
implementation issues. Wang et al. [108] developed an online 
decision support system and real-time monitoring to enhance 
the reliability of CC delivery systems. Storøy et al. [107] 
developed a ‘TraceFood’ model, which suggests common 
principles for the unique identification of perishable items, 
good traceability practices, standards for the electronic 
exchange of traceability information, and the interrelationship 
between data elements. Ruiz-Garcia and Lunadei [106] 
highlighted the significant challenges in RFID applications, 
such as extreme temperatures, dirt, harsh environments, the 
need for longer reading ranges, heterogeneous standards, and 
vast data volumes. Regattieri et al. [105] studied the regulatory 
and legal perspectives of the traceability of perishable products 
and designed a model to identify fundamental functionalities 
and mainstays. Kelepouris et al. [104] shed light on the 
significant requirements for traceability, and how RFID 
technology can meet these requirements. Feng et al. [103] 
demonstrated the CC's information acquisition, transformation, 
and transmission process. Bosona and Gebresenbet [102] 
identified and provided a definition of motivating forces, 
obstacles in designing and executing traceability systems, 
advantages, novel traceability technologies, improvements, and 
performance of food traceability systems. Researchers have 
provided a novel conceptual definition of traceability system as 
a crucial logistics element. They concluded that deep 
knowledge of fundamental processes from legal, technological, 
and social issues is crucial for developing efficient and 
complete CC traceability systems. Barge et al. [101] verified 
the effect of tag type and shape, required antenna orientation 
and polarisation, power, fixing method, and ripening duration 
on reading traceability reliability and performance. Finally, 
Badia-Melis et al. [100] clarified the role of advanced 
traceability systems at different stages of CC. They claimed that 
offering detailed information about product quality and safety 
throughout the CC could also win customers’ confidence. 
1) Findings and future research avenues 
The four clusters derived from the article co-citation analysis 
have been investigated in detail in Table 4. This table presents 
the current research themes and suggests an agenda for future 
research related to each theme. When treated separately, the 
clusters interacted meaningfully with each other. Specifically, 
particular technologies and their broader infrastructures 
(Cluster 1) improve product quality and shelf-life prediction 
(Cluster 2). These two themes enabled the third and fourth 
themes. Based on technologies and architecture complemented 
with proper statistical analysis and modelling - which takes the 
form of Big Data [109] increasingly- it is possible to implement 
‘smart packaging’ and ‘real-time traceability.’ The latter two 
offer valuable opportunities for future applications and research 
on sustainability and commercialisation, as explained 
subsequently. 
Studies in cluster 1 focused on WSN and RFID as two key 
technologies that provide better temperature monitoring 
capabilities than traditional temperature mapping techniques 
[45][110]. While past research has focused on documenting and 
improving the application of these technologies to CC, future 
research should emphasise solving persisting technical hurdles, 
especially regarding WSN. These include, but are not limited 
to, increasing the autonomy of WSN (e.g. harsh environment, 
self-healing, and self-organisation) and the scalability of 
interconnected WSN (e.g. interconnecting thousands of nodes), 
operation at low bandwidth, and self-configuration. Regarding 
RFID, while its performance is comparable and often superior 
to that of other technologies for mapping temperatures, it still 
suffers from higher costs [53][84][111]. 
In line with Hong et al. [53], more research should 
investigate the routes for financially viable RFID integration 
within CC traceability systems. The differentiated performance 
and possible costs of various RFID tags, such as active tags, 
passive functional tags, passive identity cards, and semi-passive 
tags [111], could also be explored to improve technical capacity 
and financial viability. Additionally, similar to many other 
technologies, WSN and RFID require large quantities of energy 
to function correctly. With regards to WSN, energy 
conservation remains a crucial issue. Simultaneously, for RFID, 
battery technology embedded in specific tags, such as semi-
passive and active tags, needs to be improved for further energy 
efficiency and environmentally neutral battery disposal. These 
research areas would further establish the much-needed 
connection between CC 4.0 and the sustainability nexus in 
operations management to meet product quality, safety, and 
customer expectations, as suggested by Ivanov et al. [112]. 
Therefore, the following research propositions (RP) are 
presented: 
RP1: Improving the technical capacities of WSN in terms of 
(a) autonomy, (2) scalability, (c) low-bandwidth operating 
mode, and (d) self-configured mode. 
RP2: Improving the financially viable application of various 
types of RFID in traceability systems. 
RP3: Exploring additional methods to improve the energy 
efficiency of WSN and RFID for environmentally neutral 
impacts. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
9
a) 
Leveraging on the growing ubiquity of cloud 
computing and blockchain technology to improve 
technologies and technological architectures 
underpinning temperature monitoring 
An additional axis researched in cluster 1 refers to the 
technical architecture and infrastructure for temperature 
monitoring. This has been widely addressed in the operations 
literature, which investigated the measures, analytics, and 
management of time-temperature conditions [113]. While past 
research in operations and other disciplines has provided 
valuable insights into the architecture, decision support 
systems, algorithms, and processes needed to better integrate 
WSN and RFID technologies in broader networks, integration 
remains limited. Current challenges pertain to deploying more 
deeply non-centralised distributed architectures (including IoT 
architectures). WSN rely on communication architectures that 
perform data transmission, whereas another type of architecture 
called ‘middleware’ refers to deployment issues and application 
development. There is a need to incorporate other new 
technologies to strengthen architectures for higher accuracy and 
access to improve both layers for optimal communication 
performance from an industry 4.0 perspective. Cloud-centric 
frameworks have been suggested as a valuable solution [52]. 
However, research in this area is limited.  Therefore, there is a 
need for refinements of pioneering works in cloud-centric or 
cloud computing-based CC, such as Gubbi et al. [52], Singh et 
al. [114], Alfian et al. [115], and Prashar et al. [116], to truly 
achieve a whole structure akin to the ‘Internet of perishable 
logistics’ proposed by Pal and Kant [117]. More specifically, 
for CC operations management, this would reveal a CC 
logistics system based on cloud computing, as Li et al. [118] 
advocated in the early 2010s. In addition, blockchain 
technology can significantly contribute to this objective. As a 
‘decentralized and secure database of transactions based on 
decentralized nodes’ [119, p. 86], it would significantly develop 
such distributed architectures to map temperature while 
allowing a host of other CC applications in a 4.0 perspective. 
RFID networks rely on a multiplicity of protocols that may 
create undue complexity and errors in mapping temperatures 
and food products, with the risk of being hacked. Protocols need 
to be more secure, lightweight, and simplified while remaining 
efficient to integrate systems better. In this regard, novel 
perspectives have emerged recently, such as ‘hash-based RFID 
mutual authentication protocol for context-aware management’ 
[120, p. 1]. Other examples include secure and ultra-lightweight 
protocols like SECLAP [121] or double PUF-based RFID 
protocol [122]. Furthermore, the connection with blockchain 
technology can further be made about protocols because several 
authors have proposed authentication RFID protocols for 
blockchain SC [123], as well as (symmetric) cryptography 
[124] to provide improved, secure, and more straightforward 
protocols. Although more complex, such mechanisms also 
integrate well within IoT-based multimedia systems, typical in 
CC 4.0. 
However, research in this area remains scarce, especially 
given the promising opportunities in these technologies to build 
complex industrial systems and applications to better monitor 
temperature and food items. This lack further hinders the 
development of operations management, as it impedes efficient 
OM and IS interfaces [125]. Hence:  
RP4: Advancing the application of cloud-centric and 
blockchain-enabled 
architectures 
and 
frameworks 
for 
temperature monitoring. 
RP5: Leveraging the potentialities of cryptography, hashing, 
and other technologies to develop more secure, ultra-weight, 
and more straightforward RFID protocols for temperature 
mapping in a CC 4.0 context. 
b) 
Harnessing the power of systemic integration and 
prescriptive analytics in more managerially-sound 
approaches while improving chain-wide 
participation in CC 4.0 
An essential part of the research in cluster 2 revolves around 
using statistical tools and methods to predict product quality 
and shelf life. These tools and methods have been used in the 
operations management literature (e.g., [126]). However, past 
research has frequently emphasised the need to integrate these 
piecemeal techniques into broader systems that can be used for 
faster decision-making purposes (e.g. [53], [73]). This impetus 
refers to the need to adopt a more managerial perspective to 
assist managers in dealing with product quality and freshness 
more effectively. This would mean transitioning from a 
descriptive and predictive analytic framework to a more 
prescriptive one [127], developing valuable algorithms and 
techniques that predict shelf-life and quality, and inform, 
recommend, suggest, and assist managers in making decisions. 
This refers to third-order logistics in monitored CC [67]. The 
most promising methods to explore and apply in this regard 
include optimisation, simulation, and heuristics-based decision-
modeling techniques [127]. Specifically, they need to be 
attached to the broader monitoring and tracking architectures 
typically discussed in the previous subsection to enable 
sophisticated information-fed decision support systems in 
operations management and logistics. 
RP6: Developing prediction tools that blend broader 
decision support systems and managerial dashboards to provide 
a managerial and strategic perspective. 
RP7: Transitioning from descriptive and predictive decision-
making tools to predictive tools that assist managers in their 
decision-making processes. 
Research in cluster 2 also paved the way for intelligent food 
logistics with the goal of increasing product quality, which is 
tantamount to operations management goals [128], because 
such RFID- and WSN-underpinned systems allow for efficient 
product and information travel that remain highly contingent 
upon synchronicity across production, storage, and distribution 
[67][129]. Thus, this issue requires collaboration between 
partners; there is a need for standardised formats, languages, 
protocols, structures, levels of technological adoption, and 
information beyond operations to enable intelligent logistics. 
While research in Cluster 2 has significantly advanced the 
technical means to efficient data and product exchange, much 
more needs to be done to develop a chain-wide propensity to 

 
10 
participate and to contribute to systems that allow high volume, 
high velocity, wide variety, and high veracity information to be 
shared across CC members.  
RP8: Developing an understanding of the determinants, best 
practices, and critical indicators of CC partners’ willingness to 
participate in inter-company relations and data exchange for 
intelligent cold food logistics. 
Research in cluster 3 centres on intelligent packaging from 
two different perspectives. The first approach approaches smart 
technologies from a technological perspective, while the second 
delves deeper into the broader ramifications of intelligent 
packaging: social, financial, or economic. Regarding the first 
perspective, despite cumulative growth in smart packaging 
performance, there is still ample room for improvement. In food 
supply chains (SC), packaging often carries multiple pieces of 
information, including physical and chemical parameters, error 
prevention alerts, nutritional values, and diet specificities. 
Innovative packaging should integrate these functions more 
effectively to foster smart food SC [15]. For example, 
biotechnology 
and 
biosensors 
may 
provide 
accurate 
information about glucose, ampers, acids, and fat for 
sustainable food engineering [130]. In addition, there remains a 
discrepancy between the results obtained for smart packaging 
performance in testing or laboratory conditions and those 
obtained in real CC systems (e.g. the difference in quantities of 
food packed, pH level, and presence of allergens) [84]. Future 
research should reduce this gap by increasing performance in 
real environments. 
RP9: Improving the capacity to display multiple information 
types (i.e. multifunctionality) of intelligent packaging. 
RP10: Minimising the technical deficiencies of smart 
packaging in actual CC conditions. 
c) 
Improving cost-efficiency of intelligent devices and 
communicating about the features of smart 
packaging to nurture consumer and public trust 
The nomological framework of smart packaging refers to its 
causes, benefits, barriers, impacts, good practices, and other 
antecedents or consequences of smart packaging. Worthwhile 
developments have been made, which contributed substantially 
to the theory of the field. However, additional research areas 
remain to be explored. First, smart packaging relies on barcode 
labels, time-temperature indicators, gas indicators, biosensors, 
holograms, micro-tags, tear labels, tapes, thermochromic inks, 
and RFID tags [94][131]. However, some technologies, 
particularly RFID, are expensive. The cost of intelligent devices 
is approximately 50–100% of the entire cost of the final 
package. By contrast, the cost of most food product packages 
should not exceed 10% of the total package cost [84]. The need 
to lower the RFID costs expressed in relation to Cluster 1 can 
be extended to include all intelligent devices for packaging. 
Alternatively, the cost premium should be justified in light of 
the superior benefits to the producer, carrier, retailer, or 
consumer. It is important to target customers because they also 
need to be educated about intelligent packaging and its features, 
benefits, and limitations to make informed purchase decisions. 
If consumers perceive little benefit in smart packaging, they 
will most likely avoid it and prefer traditional formats. Given 
the enormous investments needed for smart packaging, 
ensuring consumer and market acceptance is crucial for 
financial viability. Apart from consumers, the public and 
society generally need to trust smart packages. Enacting trust is 
a complex process because it entails a broad array of measures, 
such as complying with regulations, eradicating device-food 
contamination possibilities, or reducing effects on humans and 
the environment [84][31]. Future studies should therefore 
explore the acceptability of smart packaging at an individual 
level using conventional models, such as the technology 
acceptance model) or UTAUT2 (unified theory of acceptance 
and use of technology), but also at the macro level using 
Rogers’ [132] diffusion of innovation theory, among many 
other frameworks. 
RP11: Improving the cost efficiency of intelligent devices 
included in smart packaging. 
RP12: Educating consumers about the specificities of smart 
packaging and assessing their acceptance and potential use of 
intelligent packaging. 
RP13: Developing strategies and approaches to cultivate 
public and consumer trust in smart packaging. 
d) 
Leverage technology for traceability and 
sustainability while ensuring consumer and social 
acceptance 
Research in Cluster 4 refers to the paradox between 
improving real-time traceability capabilities on the one hand 
while addressing societal concerns and concerns concerning 
these pervasive technologies on the other. From a technical and 
performance perspective, continuous efforts should be devoted 
to improving traceability in CC. In addition, blockchain and 
algorithm-driven food traceability solutions should be 
researched more extensively (e.g. [133], mainly because they 
improve the operation of the SC [134] and, subsequently, 
inventory management [135]. There is also a strong need to 
incorporate these tools into a broader decision-support 
framework for food traceability. Nevertheless, this remains 
challenging because of the variety of foods accounting for food 
CC complexity [37]. Consequently, future research should 
explore new avenues to integrate various tools, food products, 
and CC stages into a comprehensive traceability framework.  
RP14: Leveraging distributed and algorithm-driven food 
traceability solutions. 
RP15: Developing comprehensive frameworks for food 
traceability. 
Addressing traceability issues from a technical viewpoint 
may reassure consumers at the point of purchase. Consumers 
are increasingly concerned about food connections and 
transparency, that is, their origin, production methods, and 
nutritional value [3]. Traceability could be leveraged to provide 
them with much needed information about the production, 
processing, and distribution processes of food items. Although 
SC traceability has become crucial in operations and SC 
management, several gaps remain [134][136]. Future research 
could investigate how consumers are aware of, accept, and 
process information originating from traceability systems and 

 
11 
possibly interact with intelligent packaging (e.g., via QR 
codes). While traceability and intelligent packaging may 
contribute to sustainability through augmented traceability, it 
remains questionable whether intelligent systems used to enable 
traceability are sustainable and contribute to the overarching 
concept of sustainable packaging. Future research should 
investigate the possibility of applying product lifetime 
extension 
strategies, 
including 
reusing, 
redistributing, 
repairing, recovering, renting, and improving product design 
[137] for longer-lasting intelligent devices. This is particularly 
important for sensors and tags because of their high volume and 
ubiquity in CC 4.0. Research should also investigate 
consumers’ role and capacity to contribute to extension 
strategies for sustainable packaging. 
RP16: Exploring consumers’ awareness, acceptance, 
preference, usage, and willingness to pay more for traceable 
food items. 
RP17: Applying product lifetime extension strategies (e.g. 
reuse, improved product design, recycling, repair, recovery, 
renting, and redistribution) to intelligent devices used within 
CC 4.0.  
RP18: Investigating consumers’ roles, resources, motivation, 
and capacities to contribute to lifetime extension strategies 
applied to intelligent devices for sustainable packaging. 
Intelligent devices remain controversial from a social and 
regulatory perspective, while contributing to consumer welfare 
and meeting sustainable objectives. The key topic in operations 
and SC management research and interests lies in traceability 
in production and consumption processes [134][135][136] . 
However, various challenges have emerged with increasingly 
ubiquitous, precise, and perceivably invasive technologies, 
such as blockchain, to ensure smooth operations and SC 
traceability [134]. Individuals may feel that they have lost their 
privacy, whereas regulatory frameworks evolve to adjust to 
these growing challenges. Consequently, regarding the second 
axis, future research could provide additional knowledge on 
how society is receptive to intelligent systems for tracing food 
items. 
RP19: Surveying public opinion about the traceability of 
food items through CC 4.0 from production to consumption. 
V. DISCUSSION AND IMPLICATIONS 
The CC 4.0 has attracted considerable attention among 
scholars 
[47][66][69][97][99][116][117][138][139][140](. 
However, an integrated examination of the research trends and 
advances in this area is still lacking. Previous studies, such as 
Shashi et al. [2][3] provided a structured literature review and a 
bibliometric/network analysis of food CC management. 
However, these studies did not specifically investigate the 
connection between food CC and Industry 4.0, and were limited 
to food CC, while CC is much broader, including 
pharmaceuticals/drugs. Sharma et al.’s [8] systematic literature 
review on machine learning applications for sustainable 
agriculture SC performance comes closer to integrating CC and 
Industry 4.0, but focuses exclusively on the ML subset of 
Industry 4.0, although the latter has a much broader scope (e.g. 
RFID, IoT sensor technology, blockchain technology, mobile 
devices, 
and 
cloud 
computing). 
Such 
reviews 
lack 
comprehensive coverage of the literature connecting CC to 
those diversified technologies (such literature would typically 
include, for example, [6], [7], [8], [9]). In addition, similar to 
Shashi et al. [2][3], Sharma et al.’s [8] study focused on the 
agricultural sector. Therefore, the current study differs 
markedly from past research in that it takes a broader 
perspective to investigate the embedding of CC – in general – 
into Industry 4.0, defined as an overarching concept that 
includes a great diversity of technologies.  
The study also differs from past research (e.g., [3], [8]) by 
recoursing bibliometric and network analyses instead of 
systematic or structured literature reviews, as bibliometrics and 
network analyses have been proven to offer more valuable 
alternatives to evaluate the current status and identify both 
emerging and established research areas [2][27][141]. This is 
particularly noticeable in CC 4.0 research area. None of the 
review-based contributions have comprehensively summarised 
this field. The major drawback of employing traditional 
methodologies (e.g. systematic or structured literature reviews) 
for conducting review studies is the dependence on tendentious 
shortlisting of a few articles, which may result in bias and flaws 
in the findings owing to incomplete analysis of vital aspects 
[142]. However, bibliometric and network analyses overcome 
the different biases caused by traditional methodologies. 
Moreover, it fully covers the literature set and can 
quantitatively explore intellectual structures, research hotspots, 
and provide new insights into specific scientific fields [142]. 
Accordingly, this study provides a comprehensive overview of 
the latest evolutions in applying Industry 4.0, technologies to 
CC processes, by summarising 618 research articles.  
This study explores the evolution of new technologies such 
as IoT, RFID, sensors, blockchain, and so on in the CC context, 
while presenting major technology enablers and defining IoT in 
SC management. The study further provides a bibliometric 
analysis conducted on a representative sample of the CC 4.0 
literature using the performance assessment and science 
mapping approaches. This allowed us to analyse the 
development of the CC 4.0 research field across countries, 
journals, and authors and obtain compelling insights into the 
conceptual and content roots of the field. As a result, four main 
research streams were identified, and 19 research propositions 
that future researchers can address contribute to the theory by 
delineating the key research themes emerging from the 
literature on CC 4.0. Thus, this review provides an informative 
overview of the most recent developments that have taken place 
in this emerging and growing area of CC 4.0, which is of 
interest to both researchers and practitioners. 
This review revealed an emerging trend in the scientific 
community that refers to integrating new technologies into CC 
to address important objectives and achieve superior 
sustainability and productivity performance. Preliminary 
applications and implementations of emerging technologies of 
the Fourth Industrial Revolution have been discussed in 
different contexts, such as temperature monitoring and real-
time track-and-trace activities, showing a positive impact on 
their purposes. These results highlight new challenges in 

 
12 
managing CC issues. The analysis has shown that these 
technologies significantly reduce uncertainties because they 
provide precise data in real time, whereas tools providing such 
real-time information offer new opportunities for organisations 
to react quickly in the face of changing conditions in SC. 
Consequently, more efficient and effective CC management 
may reduce energy consumption, leading to more sustainable 
CC. 
In this vein, future policymakers should focus their attention 
on the application and scalability of Industry 4.0, in real-world 
cases, to improve the management of SC from three 
sustainability perspectives–economic, environmental, and 
social–in an integrated view. It is recommended that additional 
real-world applications and practically oriented research 
incorporate different Industry 4.0 technologies into SC and 
manufacturing systems. These technologies produce a large 
amount of data, and special attention should be paid to the 
identification of formal methods and strategies to extract and 
formalise knowledge created by the integration of the different 
technologies and investigate how they differentiate from the 
existing solutions and impact the challenges of increasing 
resilience, flexibility, sustainability, agility, and efficiency 
along with the whole SC from the manufacturers to the final 
customers. In this sense, an investigation of the SC scenario, 
where disruptions frequently and significantly affect perishable 
products and CC resilience, can be an interesting future 
research avenue for identifying policy implications.   
Furthermore, the study offers additional evidence on 
different areas and methods of Industry 4.0, executions in CC, 
and possible outcomes, improving managers' awareness and 
understanding before executing it as a strategic intervention. 
More specifically, managers can obtain detailed insights on 
diverse aspects such as CC monitoring and modulating systems; 
legal, regulatory, technological, and social considerations of 
traceability; CC predictor software for optimised CC 
management; active and intelligent packaging technologies; 
technical and commercial implementation of intelligent 
packaging; electronic fresh food spoilage indicators; benefits of 
advanced traceability systems for consumers; CC shelf-life 
decision support system for CC management; and RFID for 
traceability and stock rotation. Reviews published in the past 
have not simultaneously covered these wider CC 4.0 
perspectives. A deep understanding of the areas mentioned 
above would assist managers in the conceptualisation of 
effective CC 4.0 strategies, and their execution will offer 
numerous benefits in terms of solid CC relationships, 
information sharing, limited wastage, customer satisfaction, 
and business growth. As the business environment is 
characterised by increasing competitiveness, deregulation, and 
constantly evolving customer demand, the traditional 
approaches, even in primary sectors, may no longer allow CC 
companies to remain profitable, and technological innovations 
can solve such a complex environment. Therefore, managers 
need new ways to stay ahead of competition, which can be 
achieved by fully exploiting the potential of Industry 4.0. 
Likewise, CC managers should collaborate with prominent 
research institutions in emerging Industry 4.0, areas that need 
solutions. Future research should focus on promoting and 
fostering technological innovation processes involving all CC 
partners working jointly for common objectives using 
integrated technologies that can increase their performance 
more significantly than if they have done it alone. In the CC 
context, real-time monitoring and continuous observation may 
result in a significant and continuous improvement in the supply 
system performance. This goal can be achieved when 
companies achieve a high level of coordination and integration 
between upstream and downstream actors. Close strategic 
relationships with suppliers and customers enable firms to learn 
and adapt to the external environment and improve their ability 
to face SC disruptions. Thus, CC integration and coordination 
can be enhanced by Industry 4.0 technologies. 
This study can motivate and guide researchers in 
investigating unexplored research areas. For instance, 
prioritising the development of technical capacities of WSN, 
but also financially viable and energy-efficient applications of 
RFID, technological protocols, strategically oriented decision 
support systems, data analytics, integrating product lifetime 
extension strategies, and multi-functionality in intelligent 
packaging. Furthermore, governmental bodies may benefit 
from the results of this study by identifying the most promising 
technologies 
which 
have 
already 
shown 
successful 
implementation. This would guide governmental programs in 
devising strategic objectives and policies for companies. 
Similarly, the government should make financial levels 
available for companies’ projects in all sectors. 
VI. CONCLUSION AND LIMITATIONS OF THE STUDY 
This study offers a detailed investigation of CC 4.0 research 
published over the last three decades by (1) assessing the 
development of the area over the period; (2) identifying and 
underlining the major CC 4.0 research trends and themes; and 
(3) providing possible avenues for future research by 
classifying the literature into clusters, identifying the 
discrepancies and limitations, and developing the research 
propositions under each cluster. A bibliometric and network 
analysis approach was applied to 618 articles retrieved from the 
WoS database, representing the period between 1991 and 
August 2020. In addition, we examined a list of productive and 
influential countries, sources, research institutions, authors, and 
their collaborations.  
From the study findings, it was noticed that the most 
productive and influential works are from China, the USA, and 
Italy. The literature began growing in 2015, and a steady 
increase in the total number of articles was observed until 2020. 
Therefore, scholars intending to pursue research in this area 
should consider the identified core sources and articles for their 
reference. The outcomes open out four critical clusters of CC 
4.0 research comprising Industry 4.0, technologies for 
temperature monitoring, quality and shelf-life prediction, 
intelligent packaging, real-time traceability, and related 
challenges. On the other hand, each cluster was divided into the 
sub-research-themes such as WSN and RFID technologies for 
monitoring temperature, 
technological architecture 
and 
infrastructure for temperature monitoring, statistical tools for 

 
13 
product quality and shelf-life prediction, intelligent food 
logistics for longer-lasting product quality, new technologies, 
and applications of smart packaging, the nomological 
framework of intelligent packaging, real-time traceability 
capabilities, and societal and commercial implications of real-
time traceability and related research. They were thoroughly 
investigated and associated research avenues were developed 
accordingly. Accordingly, 19 research propositions were 
proposed, inviting future researchers to answer them as research 
questions.  
This study has some limitations. Although we analysed an 
appropriate number of articles extracted from the reputed WoS 
database, the integration of other databases could have resulted 
in additional relevant articles. Therefore, future studies should 
use these databases. Moreover, our literature search was limited 
to SC and logistics. Therefore, future studies can incorporate 
broader perspectives by adding keywords from operations 
management to provide a comprehensive overview. In addition, 
the development of lean, agile, and resilient CC capacities is 
growing, and their conceptualisation and empirical testing 
could significantly contribute to the development of state-of-
the-art. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] G. Hu, X. Mu, M. Xu, and S. A. Miller, “Potentials of GHG 
emission reductions from cold chain systems: Case studies of 
China and the United States,” J. Clean. Prod., vol. 239, 
118053, 2019. 
[2] Shashi, P. Centobelli, R. Cerchione, and M. Ertz, “Food cold 
chain management: What we know and what we deserve,” 
Supply Chain Manag., vol. 26, no. 1, pp. 102–135, 2020. 
[3] Shashi, R. Cerchione, R. Singh, P. Centobelli, A. Shabani, 
“Food cold chain management: From a structured literature 
review to a conceptual framework and research agenda,” Int. 
J. Logist. Manag., vol. 29, no. 3, pp. 792–821, 2018. 
[4] M. Babagolzadeh, A. Shrestha, B. Abbasi, Y. Zhang, A. 
Woodhead, A. Zhang, “Sustainable cold supply chain 
management under demand uncertainty and carbon tax 
regulation,” Transport. Res. Part D Transport Env., vol. 80, 
102245, 2020. 
[5] B. R. Heard and S. A. Miller, “Potential changes in 
greenhouse gas emissions from refrigerated supply chain 
introduction in a developing food system,” Environ. Sci. 
Technol., vol. 53, pp. 251–260, 2019. 
[6] M. Piccarozzi, B. Aquilani, and C. Gatti, “Industry 4.0 in 
management 
studies: 
A 
systematic 
literature 
review,” Sustain., vol. 10, no. 10, 3821, 2018. 
[7] I. Park, B. Yoon, S. Kim, and H. Seol, “Technological 
opportunities discovery for safety through topic modeling 
and opinion mining in the fourth industrial revolution: The 
case of artificial intelligence,” IEEE Trans. Eng. Manag., 
Early Access, 2019. 
[8] R. Sharma, S. S. Kamble, A. Gunasekaran, V. Kumar, and A. 
Kumar, “A systematic literature review on machine learning 
applications for sustainable agriculture supply chain 
performance,” Comput. Oper. Res., vol. 119, 104926, 2020. 
[9] N. Virmani, U. R. Salve, A. Kumar, and S. Luthra, 
“Analyzing roadblocks of industry 4.0 adoption using graph 
theory and matrix approach,” IEEE Trans. Eng. Manag., 
Early Access. 2021. 
[10] B. Bigliardi, G. Casella, and E. Bottani,  “Industry 4.0 in the 
logistics field: A bibliometric analysis.” IET Collab. Intell. 
Manuf., vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 4–12, 2021. 
[11] Shashi, R. Singh, and A. Shabani, “The identification of key 
success factors in sustainable cold chain management: 
Insights from the Indian food industry,” J. Oper. Supply 
Chain Manag., vol. 9, no. 2, pp. 1–16, 2016. 
[12] M. Quayson, C. Bai, and J. Sarkis, “Technology for social 
good foundations: A perspective from the smallholder farmer 
in sustainable supply chains,” IEEE Trans. Eng. Manag., vol. 
63, no. 3, pp. 894–898, 2020. 
[13] B. Ding, “Pharma industry 4.0: Literature review and 
research opportunities in sustainable pharmaceutical supply 
chains,” Process Saf. Environ. Prot., vol. 119, pp. 115–130, 
2018. 
[14] R. Badia-Melis, U. Mc Carthy, L. Ruiz-Garcia, J. Garcia-
Hierro, and J. R. Villalba, “New trends in cold chain 
monitoring applications: A review,” Food Control, vol. 86, 
pp. 170–182, 2018. 
[15] S. Chen, S. Brahma, J. Mackay, C. Cao, and B.  Aliakbarian, 
“The role of smart packaging system in food supply chain,” 
J. Food Sci., vol. 85, no. 3, 517–525, 2020. 
[16] N. Fu, T. C. E. Cheng, and Z. Tian, “RFID investment 
strategy for fresh food supply chains,” J. Oper. Res. Soc., vol. 
70, no. 9, 1475–1489, 2019. 
[17] M. Bertolini, E. Bottani, A. Rizzi, A. Volpi, P. Renzi, 
“Shrinkage reduction in perishable food supply chain by 
means of an RFID-based FIFO management policy,” Int. J. 
RF Tech., vol 5(3-4), 123-136, 2013. 
[18] E. Bottani and R. Montanari, “RFID and real-time 
localization systems for warehouse management: A model 
for technical and economic evaluation,” Int. J. RF Technol., 
vol. 4, no. 3–4, 209–245, 2013. 
[19] E. 
Bottani, 
M. 
Bertolini, 
A. 
Rizzi, 
and 
G. 
Romagnoli, “Monitoring on-shelf availability, out-of-stock 
and product freshness through RFID in the fresh food supply 
chain,” Int. J. RF Technol., vol. 8, no. 1–2, 33–55, 2017. 
[20] G. Alfian, M. Syafrudin, U. Farooq, M. R. Ma'arif, M. A. 
Syaekhoni, N. L. Fitriyani,... and J. Rhee, “Improving 
efficiency of RFID-based traceability system for perishable 
food by utilizing IOT sensors and machine learning model,” 
Food Control, vol. 110, 107016, 2020. 
[21] E. Bottani, and A. Rizzi, “Economical assessment of the 
impact of RFID technology and EPC system on the fast-
moving consumer goods supply chain,” Int. J. Prod. Econ., 
vol. 112, no. 2, 548–569, 2008. 
[22] E. Bottani, M. Bertolini, R. Montanari, and A. Volpi,  
“RFID-enabled business intelligence modules for supply 
chain optimisation,” Int. J. RF Technol., vol. 1, no. 4, 253–
278, 2009. 
[23] E. Bottani, R. Montanari, and A. Volpi, “The impact of RFID 
and EPC network on the bullwhip effect in the Italian FMCG 
supply chain,” Int. J. Prod. Econ., vol. 124, no. 2, 426–432, 
2010. 
[24] J. R. Villalobos, W. E. Soto-Silva, M. C. González-Araya, 
and R. G. González–Ramirez,  “Research directions in 
technology development to support real-time decisions of 
fresh produce logistics: A review and research agenda,” 
Comput. Electron. Agric., vol. 167, 105092, 2019. 
[25] C. A. Hill, G. P. Zhang, and G. D. Scudder, “An empirical 
investigation of EDI usage and performance improvement in 
food supply chains,” IEEE Trans. Eng. Manag., vol. 56, 1, 
61–75, 2008. 
[26] E. Bottani, M. Manfredi, G. Vignali, and A. Volpi, “Life 
cycle assessment of RFID implementation in the fresh food 
supply chain,” Int. J. RF Technol., vol. 6, no. 1, 51–71, 2014. 
[27] B. Müßigmann, H. von der Gracht, and E. Hartmann, 
“Blockchain technology in logistics and supply chain 
management: A bibliometric literature review from 2016 to 
January 2020,” IEEE Trans. Eng. Manag., vol. 67, no. 4, 
988–1007, 2020. 
[28] N. J. Van Eck and L. Waltman, “Visualizing bibliometric 
networks,”. In, Measuring scholarly impact: Methods and 
Practice, Y. Ding, R. Rousseau, D. Wolfram, Eds., Springer, 
2014. pp. 285–320 
[29] F. G. De Bakker, P. Groenewegen, and F. Den Hond, “A 
bibliometric analysis of 30 years of research and theory on 

 
14 
corporate social responsibility and corporate social 
performance,” Bus. Soc., vol. 44, no. 3, pp. 283–317, 2005. 
[30] E. Lacka, H. K. Chan, and X. Wang, “Technological 
advancements and B2B international trade: A bibliometric 
analysis and review of industrial marketing research,” Ind. 
Mark. Manag., vol. 88, pp. 1–11, 2020. 
[31] J. M. Merigó, A. Mas-Tur, N. Roig-Tierno, and D. Ribeiro-
Soriano, “A bibliometric overview of the Journal of Business 
Research between 1973 and 2014,” J. Bus. Res., vol. 68, no. 
12, pp. 2645–2653, 2015. 
[32] E. M. Murgado-Armenteros, M. Gutiérrez-Salcedo, F. J. 
Torres-Ruiz, and M. J. Cobo, “Analysing the conceptual 
evolution of qualitative marketing research through science  
mapping analysis,” Scientometr., vol. 102, no. 1, pp. 519–
557, 2015. 
[33] M. E. Falagas, E. I.  Pitsouni, G. A. Malietzis, G. Pappas, 
“Comparison of PubMed, Scopus, web of science, and 
Google Scholar: Strengths and weaknesses,” Faseb J., vol. 
22, no. 2, pp. 338–342, 2008. 
[34] A. A. Chadegani, H. Salehi, M. Yunus, H. Farhadi, M. 
Fooladi, M. Farhadi, and N. Ale Ebrahim, “A comparison 
between two main academic literature collections: Web of 
Science and Scopus databases,” Asian Soc. Sci., vol. 9, no. 5, 
pp. 18–26, 2013. 
[35] N. Humphrey, “Estimating ice temperature from short 
records in thermally disturbed boreholes,” J. Glaciol., vol. 
37, 127, pp. 414–419, 1991. 
[36] C. S. Tang and L. P. Veelenturf, “The strategic role of 
logistics in the industry 4.0 era,” Transport. Res. Part E 
Logist. Transport. Rev., vol. 129, pp. 1–11, 2019. 
[37] J. Qian, L. Ruiz-Garcia, B. Fan, J. I. R. Villalba, U. 
McCarthy, B. Zhang,... and W. Wu, “Food traceability 
system from governmental, corporate, and consumer 
perspectives in the European Union and China: A 
comparative review,” Trend. Food Sci. Technol., vol. 99, pp. 
402–412, 2020. 
[38] S. Luthra and S. K. Mangla, “Evaluating challenges to 
Industry 4.0 initiatives for supply chain sustainability in 
emerging economies,” Proc. Saf. Environ. Prot., vol. 117, 
pp. 168–179, 2018. 
[39] Z. Wang, Y. Zhao, and B. Wang, “A bibliometric analysis of 
climate change adaptation based on massive research 
literature data,” J. Clean. Prod., vol. 199, pp. 1072–1082, 
2018. 
[40] F. Cucchiella, I. D’Adamo, S. L. Koh, P. Rosa, “Recycling 
of WEEEs: An economic assessment of present and future e-
waste streams,” Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev., vol. 51, pp. 
263–272, 2015. 
[41] H. Small, “Visualizing science by citation mapping,” J. Am. 
Soc. Inf. Sci., vol. 50, no. 9, pp. 799–813, 1999. 
[42] B. Kumar, A. Sharma, S. Vatavwala, and P. Kumar, “Digital 
mediation in business-to-business marketing: A bibliometric 
analysis,” Ind. Mark. Manag., vol. 85, pp. 126–140, 2020. 
[43] M. A. Koseoglu, “Growth and structure of authorship and co-
authorship network in the strategic management realm: 
Evidence from the Strategic Management Journal,” BRQ 
Bus. Res. Q., vol. 19, no. 3, pp. 153–170, 2016. 
[44]  N. J. Van Eck, L. Waltman, “How to normalize 
cooccurrence data? An analysis of some well-known 
similarity measures,” J. Aa Soc. Inf. Sci. Tech., vol. 16, no. 
8, pp. 1635-1651, 2009.   
[45] C. Amador, J. P. Emond, and M. C. do Nascimento Nunes, 
“Application of RFID technologies in the temperature 
mapping of the pineapple supply chain,” Sens. Instrum. Food 
Qual. Saf., vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 26–33, 2009. 
[46] L. Atzori, A. Iera, and G. Morabito, “The internet of things: 
A survey,” Comput. Netw., vol. 54, no. 15, pp. 2787–2805, 
2010. 
[47] M. M. Aung and Y. S. Chang, “Temperature management for 
the quality assurance of a perishable food supply 
chain,” Food Control, vol. 40, pp. 198–207, 2014. 
[48] R. Badia-Melis, J. Garcia-Hierro, L. Ruiz-Garcia, T. 
Jiménez-Ariza, J. I. R. Villalba, and P. Barreiro, “Assessing 
the dynamic behavior of WSN motes and RFID semi-passive 
tags for temperature monitoring,” Comput. Electron. 
Agric., vol. 103, pp. 11–16, 2014. 
[49] R. Badia-Melis, L. Ruiz-Garcia, J. Garcia-Hierro, and J. I. R. 
Villalba, “Refrigerated fruit storage monitoring combining 
two different wireless sensing technologies: RFID and 
WSN,” Sens., vol. 15, no. 3, pp. 4781–4795, 2015. 
[50] Y. Y. Chen, Y. J. Wang, and J. K. Jan, “A novel deployment 
of smart cold chain system using 2G-RFID-Sys,” J. Food 
Eng., vol. 141, pp. 113–121, 2014. 
[51] E. Gogou, G. Katsaros, E. Derens, G. Alvarez, and P. S. 
Taoukis, “Cold chain database development and application 
as a tool for the cold chain management and food quality 
evaluation,” Int. J. Refrig., vol. 52, pp. 109–121, 2015. 
[52] J. Gubbi, R. Buyya, S. Marusic, and M. Palaniswami, 
“Internet of Things (IoT): A vision, architectural elements, 
and future directions,” Futur. Generat. Comput. Syst., vol. 
29, no. 7, pp. 1645–1660, 2013. 
[53] I. H. Hong, J. F. Dang, Y. H. Tsai, C. S. Liu, W. T. Lee, M. 
L. Wang, and P. C. Chen, “An RFID application in the food 
supply chain: A case study of convenience stores in 
Taiwan,” J. Food Eng., vol. 106, no. 2, pp. 119–126, 2011. 
[54] Y. S. Kang, H. Jin, O. Ryou, and Y. H. Lee, “A simulation 
approach for optimal design of RFID sensor tag-based cold 
chain systems,” J. Food Eng., vol. 113, no. 1, pp. 1–10, 2012. 
[55] W. R. Kim, M. M. Aung, Y. S. Chang, and C. Makatsoris, 
“Freshness Gauge based cold storage management: A 
method for adjusting temperature and humidity levels for 
food quality,” Food Control, vol. 47, pp. 510–519, 2015. 
[56] J. C. Kuo and M. C. Chen, “Developing an advanced multi-
temperature joint distribution system for the food cold 
chain,” Food Control, vol. 21, no. 4, pp. 559–566, 2010. 
[57] L. Qi, M. Xu, Z. Fu, T. Mira, and X. Zhang, “C2SLDS: A 
WSN-based perishable food shelf-life prediction and LSFO 
strategy 
decision 
support 
system 
in 
cold 
chain 
logistics,” Food Control, vol. 38, pp. 19–29, 2014. 
[58] L. Ruiz-Garcia, P. Barreiro, J. I. Robla, "Performance of 
ZigBee-based wireless sensor nodes for real-time monitoring 
of fruit logistics,” J. Food Eng., vol. 87, no. 3, pp. 405–415, 
2008a. 
[59] L. Ruiz-Garcia, P. Barreiro, A. Anand, and J. I. Robla, 
“Modeling psychrometric data in real-time fruit logistics 
monitoring,” 
In IV 
International 
Symposium 
on 
Applications of Modelling as an Innovative Technology in 
the Agri-Food-Chain: Model-IT 802, 2008. pp. 385–390 
[60] M. Thakur and E. Forås, “EPCIS based online temperature 
monitoring and traceability in a cold meat chain,” Comput. 
Electron. Agric., vol. 117, pp. 22–30, 2014. 
[61] C. N. Verdouw, J. Wolfert, A. J. M. Beulens, and A. 
Rialland, “Virtualization of food supply chains with the 
internet of things,” J. Food Eng., vol. 176, pp. 128–136, 
2016. 
[62] J. Wang, H. Wang, J. He, L. Li, M. Shen, X. Tan,... and L. 
Zheng, “Wireless sensor network for real-time perishable 
food 
supply 
chain 
management,” Comput. 
Electron. 
Agric., vol. 110, pp. 196–207, 2015. 
[63] X. Xiao, Q. He, Z. Fu, M. Xu, and X. Zhang, “Applying CS 
and WSN methods for improving efficiency of frozen and 
chilled aquatic products monitoring system in cold chain 
logistics,” Food Control, vol. 60, pp. 656–666, 2016. 
[64] M. Grunow and S. Piramuthu, “RFID in highly perishable 
food supply chains–Remaining shelf life to supplant expiry 
date?” Int. J. Prod. Econ., vol. 146, no. 2, pp. 717–727, 2013. 
[65] J. Gustavsson, C. Cederberg, U. Sonesson, R. van Otterdijk 
and A. Meybeck, “Global food losses and food waste: Extent, 
causes and prevention,” Rome: Food and Agriculture 
Organisation of the United Nations, 2011. 
[66] J. K. Heising, M. Dekker, P. V. Bartels, and M. A. J. S. Van 
Boekel, “Monitoring the quality of perishable foods: 
Opportunities for intelligent packaging,” Crit. Rev. Food Sci. 
Nutr., vol. 54, no. 5, pp. 645–654, 2014. 
[67] M. L. Hertog, I. Uysal, U. McCarthy, B. M. Verlinden, and 
B. M. Nicolaï, “Shelf life modelling for first-expired-first-out 
warehouse management,” Philos. Trans. Royal Soc. A Math. 
Phys. Eng. Sci., vol. 372, no. 2017, 20130306, 2014. 

 
15 
[68] R. Jedermann, L. Ruiz-Garcia, and W. Lang, “Spatial 
temperature profiling by semi-passive RFID loggers for 
perishable 
food 
transportation,” Comput. 
Electron. 
Agric., vol. 65, no. 2, pp. 145–154, 2009. 
[69] R. Jedermann, M. Nicometo, I. Uysal, and W. Lang, 
“Reducing food losses by intelligent food logistics,” Philos. 
Trans. Royal Soc. A Math. Phys. Eng. Sci., 2014. 
[70] R. Jedermann, T. Poetsch, and W. Lang, “Smart sensors for 
the intelligent container,” In Smart SysTech 2014; European 
Conference on Smart Objects, Systems and Technologies. 
IEEE, 2014. pp. 1–2 
[71] O. Laguerre, H. M. Hoang, and D. Flick, “Experimental 
investigation and modeling in the food cold chain: Thermal 
and quality evolution,” Trend. Food Sci. Technol., vol. 29, 
no. 2, pp. 87–97, 2013. 
[72] W. Lang, R. Jedermann, D. Mrugala, A. Jabbari, B. Krieg-
Brückner, and K. Schill, “The “intelligent container”—a 
cognitive sensor network for transport management,” IEEE 
Sens. J., vol. 11, no. 3, pp. 688–698, 2011. 
[73] R. Montanari, “Cold chain tracking: A managerial 
perspective,” Trend. Food Sci. Technol., vol. 19, no. 8, pp. 
425-431, 2008. 
[74] M. C. D. N Nunes, M. Nicometo, J. P. Emond, R. B. Melis, 
and I. Uysal, “Improvement in fresh fruit and vegetable 
logistics quality: Berry logistics field studies,” Philos. Trans. 
Series A Math. Phys. Eng. Sci., vol. 372, no. 2022, 2014. 
[75] J. Parfitt, M. Barthel, and S. Macnaughton, “Food waste 
within food supply chains: Quantification and potential for 
change to 2050,” Philos. Trans. Royal Soc. B Biol. Sci., vol. 
365, no. 1554, pp. 3065–3081, 2010. 
[76] J. Rodríguez-Bermejo, P. Barreiro, J. I. Robla, and L. Ruiz-
Garcia, “Thermal study of a transport container,” J. Food 
Eng., vol. 80, no. 2, pp. 517–527, 2007. 
[77] A. Rong, R. Akkerman, and M. Grunow, “An optimization 
approach for managing fresh food quality throughout the 
supply chain,” Int. J. Prod. Econ., vol. 131, no. 1, pp. 421–
429, 2011. 
[78] L. Ruiz-Garcia, L. Lunadei, P. Barreiro, and I. Robla, “A 
review of wireless sensor technologies and applications in 
agriculture and food industry: State of the art and current 
trends,” Sens., vol. 9, no. 6, pp. 4728–4750, 2009. 
[79] X. Wang and D. Li, “A dynamic product quality evaluation 
based 
pricing 
model 
for 
perishable 
food 
supply 
chains,” Omega, vol. 40, no. 6, pp. 906–917, 2012. 
[80] Zou et al., 2014 
[81] F. Bibi, C. Guillaume, N. Gontard, and B. Sorli, “A review: 
RFID technology having sensing aptitudes for food industry 
and their contribution to tracking and monitoring of food 
products,” Trend. Food Sci. Technol., vol. 62, pp.  91–103, 
2017. 
[82] C. Costa, F. Antonucci, F. Pallottino, J. Aguzzi, D. Sarriá, 
and P. Menesatti, “A review on agri-food supply chain 
traceability 
by 
means 
of 
RFID 
technology,” Food 
Bioprocess Technol., vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 353–366, 2013. 
[83] Finkenzeller, K., 2003. “RFID-Handbook,” Hoboken..  
[84] M. Ghaani, C. A. Cozzolino, G. Castelli, and S. Farris, “An 
overview of the intelligent packaging technologies in the 
food sector,” Trend. Food Sci. Technol., vol. 51, pp. 1–11, 
2016. 
[85] M. C. Giannakourou, K. Koutsoumanis, G. J. E. Nychas, and 
P. S. Taoukis, “Field evaluation of the application of time 
temperature integrators for monitoring fish quality in the 
chill chain,” Int. J. Food Microbiol., vol. 102, no. 3, pp. 323–
336, 2005. 
[86] R. Jedermann, C. Behrens, D. Westphal, and W. Lang, 
“Applying autonomous sensor systems in logistics—
Combining 
sensor 
networks, 
RFIDs 
and 
software 
agents,” Sens. Actuator A Phys., vol. 132, no. 1, pp. 370–375, 
2006. 
[87] J. P. Kerry, M. N. O'Grady, and S. A. Hogan, “Past, current 
and potential utilisation of active and intelligent packaging 
systems 
for 
meat 
and 
muscle-based 
products: 
A 
review,” Meat Sci., vol. 74, no. 1, pp. 113–130, 2006. 
[88] K. Koutsoumanis, P. S. Taoukis, and G. J. E. Nychas, 
“Development of a safety monitoring and assurance system 
for chilled food products,” Int. J. Food Microbiol., vol. 100, 
no. 1–3, pp. 253–260, 2005. 
[89] P. Kumar, H. W. Reinitz, J. Simunovic, K. P. Sandeep, and 
P. D. Franzon, “Overview of RFID technology and its 
applications in the food industry,” J. Food Sci., vol. 74, no. 
8, pp. R101–R106, 2009. 
[90] B. Kuswandi, Y. Wicaksono, A. Abdullah, H. L. Y. Jayus, 
and M. Ahmad, “Smart packaging: Sensors for monitoring of 
food quality and safety,” Sens. Instrum. Food Qual. Saf., pp. 
137–146, 2011.  
[91] A. Pacquit, J. Frisby, D. Diamond, K. T. Lau, A. Farrell, B. 
Quilty, and D. Diamond, “Development of a smart packaging 
for the monitoring of fish spoilage,’’ Food Chem., vol. 102, 
no. 2, pp. 466–470, 2007. 
[92] P. Papetti, C. Costa, F. Antonucci, S. Figorilli, S. Solaini, and 
P. Menesatti, “A RFID web-based infotracing system for the 
artisanal 
Italian 
cheese 
quality 
traceability,” Food 
Control, vol. 27, no. 1, pp. 234–241, 2012. 
[93] P. S. Taoukis and T. P. Labuza, “Reliability of time‐
temperature indicators as food quality monitors under 
nonisothermal conditions,” J. Food Sci., vol. 54, no. 4, pp. 
789–792, 1989. 
[94] M. Vanderroost, P. Ragaert, F. Devlieghere, and B. De 
Meulenaer, 
“Intelligent 
food 
packaging: 
The 
next 
generation,” Trend. Food Sci. Technol., vol. 39, no. 1, pp. 
47–62, 2014. 
[95] K. L. Yam, P. T. Takhistov, and J. Miltz, “Intelligent 
packaging: Concepts and applications,” J. Food Sci., vol. 70, 
no. 1, pp. R1–R10, 2005. 
[96] J. Zhang, Z. Xiaoshuan, L. Zhang, S. Li, and J. Hu, “Design 
on wireless SO2 sensor node based on CC2530 for 
monitoring table grape logistics,” J. Food Agric. Env., vol. 
11, no. 1, pp. 115–117, 2013. 
[97] E. Abad, F. Palacio, M. Nuin, A. G. De Zarate, A. Juarros, J. 
M. Gómez, and S. Marco, RFID smart tag for traceability and 
cold chain monitoring of foods: Demonstration in an 
intercontinental fresh fish logistic chain. J. Food Eng., vol. 
93, no. 4, pp. 394–399, 2009. 
[98] R. Angeles, “RFID technologies: Supply-chain applications 
and implementation issues,” Inf. Syst. Manag., vol. 22, no. 1, 
pp. 51–65, 2005. 
[99] M. M. Aung and Y. S. Chang, “Traceability in a food supply 
chain: Safety and quality perspectives,” Food Control, vol. 
39, pp. 172–184, 2014. 
[100] R. Badia-Melis, P. Mishra, and L. Ruiz-García, “Food 
traceability: 
New 
trends 
and 
recent 
advances. 
A 
review,” Food Control, 57, pp. 393–401, 2015. 
[101] P. Barge, P. Gay, V. Merlino, and C. Tortia, “Item-level 
radio-frequency identification for the traceability of food 
products: Application on a dairy product,” J. Food Eng., vol. 
125, pp. 119–130, 2014. 
[102] T. Bosona and G. Gebresenbet, “Food traceability as an 
integral part of logistics management in food and agricultural 
supply chain,” Food Control, vol. 33(1), pp. 32–48, 2013. 
[103] J. Feng, Z. Fu, Z. Wang, M. Xu, and X. Zhang, 
“Development and evaluation on a RFID-based traceability 
system for cattle/beef quality safety in China,” Food 
Control, vol. 31, no. 2, pp. 314–325, 2013. 
[104] T. Kelepouris, K. Pramatari, and G. Doukidis, RFID‐enabled 
traceability in the food supply chain. Ind. Manag. Data Syst., 
vol. 107, no. 2, pp. 183–200, 2007. 
[105] A. Regattieri, M. Gamberi, and R. Manzini, “Traceability of 
food products: General framework and experimental 
evidence,” J. Food Eng., vol. 81, no. 2, pp. 347–356, 2007. 
[106] L. Ruiz-Garcia and L. Lunadei, “The role of RFID in 
agriculture: 
Applications, 
limitations 
and 
challenges,” Comput. Electron. Agric., vol. 79, no. 1, pp. 42–
50, 2011. 
[107] J. Storøy, M. Thakur, and P. Olsen, “The tracefood 
framework–Principles and guidelines for implementing 
traceability in food value chains,” J. Food Eng., vol. 115, no. 
1, pp. 41–48, 2013. 
[108] L. Wang, S. K. Kwok, and W. H. Ip, “A radio frequency 
identification and sensor-based system for the transportation 
of food,” J. Food Eng., vol. 101, no. 1, pp. 120–129, 2010. 

 
16 
[109] S. Erevelles, N. Fukawa, and L. Swayne, “Big Data 
consumer analytics and the transformation of marketing,” J. 
Bus. Res., vol. 69, no. 2, pp. 897–904, 2016. 
[110] H. Chang, N. Zhou, X. Zhao, Q. Cao, M. Tan, M. and Y. 
Zhang, “A new agriculture monitoring system based on 
WSNs,” In 2014 12th International Conference on Signal 
Processing (ICSP) (pp. 1755-1760). IEEE, 2014 
[111] S. Toffaletti and J. Soldatos “RFID-ROI-SME project 
promises big help for small business,” RFID J., vol. 14, 
2010.  
[112] D. Ivanov, A. Tsipoulanidis, and J. Schönberger, “Digital 
supply chain, smart operations and industry 4.0,” In Global 
Supply Chain and Operations Management. Springer, 
Cham., 2019. pp. 481–526. 
[113] S. Mercier, S. Villeneuve, M. Mondor, and I. Uysal, “Time–
temperature management along the food cold chain: A 
review of recent developments,” Compr. Rev. Food Sci. Food 
Saf., vol. 16, no. 4, pp. 647–667, 2017. 
[114] A. Singh, S. Kumari, H. Malekpoor, and N. Mishra, “Big 
data cloud computing framework for low carbon supplier 
selection in the beef supply chain,” J. Clean. Prod., vol. 202, 
pp. 139–149, 2018. 
[115] G. Alfian, J. Rhee, H. Ahn, J. Lee, U. Farooq, M. F. Ijaz, and 
M. A. Syaekhoni, “Integration of RFID, wireless sensor 
networks, and data mining in an e-pedigree food traceability 
system,” J. Food Eng., vol. 212, pp. 65–75, 2017. 
[116] D. Prashar, N. Jha, S. Jha, Y. Lee, and G. P. Joshi, 
“Blockchain-based traceability and visibility for agricultural 
products: A decentralized way of ensuring food safety in 
India,” Sustain., vol. 12, no. 8, pp. 3497, 2020. 
[117] A. Pal, and K. Kant, “Internet of perishable logistics: 
Building smart fresh food supply chain networks,” IEEE 
Access, vol. 7, pp. 17675–17695, 2019. 
[118] X. Xuefeng, Y. Wang, X. Chen, “Cold chain logistics based 
on cloud computing,” Concurr. Comput., vol. 24, no. 17, pp. 
2138-2150, 2012. 
[119] M. Ertz and É. Boily, “The rise of the digital economy: 
Thoughts on blockchain technology and cryptocurrencies for 
the collaborative economy,” Int. J. Innov. Stud., vol. 3, no. 4, 
pp. 84–93, 2019. 
[120] D. B. Deebak, F. Al-Turjman, and L. Mostarda, “A hash-
based RFID authentication mechanism for context-aware 
management in IoT-based multimedia systems,” Sens., vol. 
19, no. 18, 3821, 2019. 
[121] S. F. Aghili, H. Mala, P. Kaliyar, and M. Conti, “Seclap: 
Secure and lightweight RFID authentication protocol for 
medical IOT,” Futur. Gen. Comput. Syst., vol. 101, pp. 621–
634, 2019. 
[122] W. Liang, S. Xie, J. Long, K. C. Li, D. Zhang, and K. Li, “A 
double PUF-based RFID identity authentication protocol in 
service-centric internet 
of things 
environments,” Inf. 
Sci., vol. 503, pp. 129–147, 2019. 
[123] M. Sidorov, M. T. Ong, R. V. Sridharan, J. Nakamura, R. 
Ohmura, and J. H. Khor, “Ultralightweight mutual 
authentication RFID protocol for blockchain enabled supply 
chains,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 7273–7285, 2019. 
[124] K. Mansoor, A. Ghani, S. A. Chaudhry, S. Shamshirband, S. 
A. K. Ghayyur, and A. Mosavi, “Securing IoT-based RFID 
systems: A robust authentication protocol using symmetric 
cryptography,” Sens., vol. 19, no. 21, 4752, 2019. 
[125] S. Kumar, V. Mookerjee, and A. Shubham, “Research in 
operations management and information systems interface,” 
Prod. Oper. Manag., vol. 27, no. 11, pp. 1893–1905, 2018. 
[126] H. Mosadegh, S. F. Ghomi, and G. A. Süer, “Stochastic 
mixed-model 
assembly 
line 
sequencing 
problem: 
Mathematical modeling and Q-learning based simulated 
annealing hyper-heuristics,” Eur. J. Oper. Res., vol. 282, no. 
2, pp. 530–544, 2020. 
[127] D. Delen and S. Ram, “Research challenges and 
opportunities in business analytics,” J. Bus. Anal., vol. 1, no. 
1, pp. 2–12, 2018. 
[128] F. T. Chan, Z. X. Wang, A. Goswami, A. Singhania, and M. 
K. Tiwari, “Multi-objective particle swarm optimisation 
based integrated production inventory routing planning for 
effective perishable food logistics operations,” Int. J. Prod. 
Res. vol. 58, no. 17, pp. 5155-5174. 
[129] U. McCarthy, I. Uysal, M. Laniel, G. Corkery, F. Butler, K. 
P. McDonnell, and S. Ward, “Sustainable global food supply 
networks,” Sustainable Food Processing, John Wiley & 
Sons, Ltd, pp. 521–538, 2014. 
[130] S. Neethirajan, V. Ragavan, X. Weng, and R. Chand, 
“Biosensors for sustainable food engineering: challenges and 
perspectives,” Biosens., vol. 8, no. 1, 23, 2018. 
[131] J. H. Han, Ed., “Innovations in food packaging,” Elsevier, 
2005. 
[132] E. M. Rogers, Diffusion of innovations, 5th ed. New York: 
Free Press, 2003. 
[133] M. Creydt and M. Fischer, “Blockchain and more-Algorithm 
driven food traceability,” Food Control, vol. 105, pp. 45–51, 
2019. 
[134] G. M. Hastig and M. S. Sodhi, “Blockchain for supply chain 
traceability: Business requirements and critical success 
factors,” Prod. Oper. Manag., vol. 29, no. 4, pp. 935–954, 
2020. 
[135] J. A. Alfaro and L. A. Rábade, “Traceability as a strategic 
tool to improve inventory management: A case study in the 
food industry,” Int. J. Prod. Econ., vol. 118, no. 1, pp. 104–
110, 2009. 
[136] X. Wang, D. Li, and L. Li, “Adding value of food traceability 
to the business: A supply chain management approach,” Int. 
J. Serv. Oper. Inform., vol. 4, no. 3, pp. 232-257, 2009. 
[137] M. Ertz, S. Leblanc-Proulx, E. Sarigöllü, and V. Morin, 
“Made to break? A taxonomy of business models on product 
lifetime extension,” J. Clean. Prod., vol. 234, pp. 867–880, 
2019. 
[138] Y. Liu, W. Han, Y. Zhang, L. Li, J. Wang, and L. Zheng, “An 
Internet-of-Things solution for food safety and quality 
control: A pilot project in China,” J. Ind. Inf. Integr., vol. 3, 
pp. 1–7, 2016. 
[139] A. Pal and K. Kant, “IoT-based sensing and communications 
infrastructure for the fresh food supply chain,” Comput., vol. 
51, no. 2, pp. 76–80, 2018. 
[140] A. Pal and K. Kant, “Smart sensing, communication, and 
control in perishable food supply chain,” ACM Trans. Sens. 
Netw., vol. 16, no. 1, pp. 1–41, 2020. 
[141] M. Ertz and S. Leblanc-Proulx, “Sustainability in the 
collaborative economy: A bibliometric analysis reveals 
emerging interest,” J. Clean. Prod., vol. 196, pp. 1073–1085, 
2018 
[142] J. Zhang, L. Jiang, Z. Liu, Y. Li, K. Liu, R. Fang,...and F. Li, 
“A bibliometric and visual analysis of indoor occupation 
environmental health risks: Development, hotspots and trend 
directions,” J. Clean. Prod., 126824, 2021. 
 
 
 
Shashi is an Assistant Professor at Indian Institute of 
Management, Sirmaur, India. He received the doctoral degree 
from School of Management Studies, Punjabi University, 
Patiala. He is presently serving as a Review Editor in “Frontiers 
in Sustainability” and published his research work in 
international 
journals 
such 
as 
“Industrial 
Marketing 
Management”, 
“International 
Journal 
of 
Production 
Economics”, “Supply Chain Management: An International 
Journal”, “Technological Forecasting and Social Change”, 
“Business Strategy and the Environment” and “International 
Journal of Logistics Management”. His current research 
interests include business-to-business marketing, sustainable 

 
17 
consumption, cold chain, value-addition, and performance 
measurement.  
 
 
 
Myriam Ertz, Ph.D., PCM®, CDMP, is an Associate Professor 
of Marketing at the University of Quebec at Chicoutimi and a 
recipient of the Social Sciences 2020 Young Investigator 
award. Her research interests include responsible consumption 
and marketing, collaborative economy, and technology. She has 
published over 80 research articles in top-quality journals, 
including Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, Journal 
of Cleaner Production, Sustainable Cities & Society, Industrial 
Marketing Management, and Business Strategy & the 
Environment, among others. Professor Ertz is also a book 
author (Marketing responsible, JFD Editions) and has extensive 
editorial experience as a book editor, journal associate editor, 
and special issue guest editor for several journals, including 
Frontiers 
in 
Psychology, 
Sustainability, 
Frontiers 
in 
Sustainability, and Revue Organisations & Territoires. 
 
 
 
Piera Centobelli is Assistant Professor at the Department of 
Industrial Engineering of the University of Naples Federico II, 
Italy. Piera is currently Professor of Business Economics and 
Organization at the same university. In 2013, Piera received 
with honors the MSc Degree in Engineering Management at the 
University of Naples Federico II, Italy. In 2016, she held a 
Ph.D. in Technology and Production Systems at the Department 
of Chemicals, Materials and Industrial Production Engineering 
(DICMAPI) of the same university. From 2013 until 2016 she 
joined the Fraunhofer Joint Laboratory of Excellence on 
Advanced Production Technology (J-LEAPT) in partnership 
with Fh-IWU of Chemnitz. Her research interests focus on 
knowledge 
and 
technology 
management, 
operations 
management, logistics and supply chain management, 
corporate social responsibility, circular economy, triple bottom 
line, environmental, economic and social sustainability, 
decision support systems, Industry 4.0, digital transformation, 
digital factory. 
 
 
 
Roberto Cerchione received the M.Eng. and Ph.D. degrees 
from the University of Naples Parthenope, Naples, Italy. He is 
Chair of IEEE Blockchain Italy, Delegate of Engineering 
Management Committee and Director of SGu at the University 
of Naples Parthenope. He is currently a Professor of 
Technology, Innovation and Management Faculty at the 
University of Bergamo and the University of Naples Federico 
II and teaches Advanced Logistics Systems and Sustainable 
Supply Chain Management at the Aerotech Academy. After his 
PhD, he was Adjunct Faculty at University of Maryland 
University College and Scientific Coordinator of technology 
transfer and R&D projects with large companies, SMEs and 
startups. He serves as Co-Editor-in-Chief the Journal of 
Entrepreneurship Education and the Academy of Strategic 
Management Journal, and acts as managing guest editor, 
section editor and editorial board member for many journals. 
He has coauthored more than 100 publications including 
articles published in leading peer-reviewed journals, book 
chapters, conference proceedings, research reports. His 
research interests focus on blockchain and 4.0 transition, 
knowledge 
and 
technology 
management, 
sustainability 
management, logistics and supply chain management, 
entrepreneurship and technology transfer 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  

 
18 
TABLES  
 
 
TABLE III 
CLUSTERING RESULTING IN THE MOST CITED REFERENCES 
Cluster 1: Industry 4.0 technologies for temperature monitoring 
(240 Citations) 
Cluster 2: Quality and shelf-life prediction (219 Citations) 
• Amador et al. [45] (12) 
• Atzori et al. [46] (20) 
• Aung and Chang [47] (19) 
• Badia-Melis et al. [48] (9) 
• Badia-Melis et al. [49] (10) 
• Chen et al. [50] (15) 
• Gogou et al. [51] (11) 
• Gubbi et al. [52] (12) 
• Hong et al. [53] (12) 
• Kang et al. [54] (10) 
• Kim et al. [55] (9) 
• Kuo and Chen [56] (10) 
• Qi et al. [57] (22) 
• Ruiz-Garcia et al. [58] (17) 
• Thakur and Forås [60] (9) 
• Verdouw et al. [61] (12) 
• Wang et al. [62] (15) 
• Xiao et al. [63] (16) 
• Grunow and Piramuthu [64] (14) 
• Gustavsson et al. [65] (14) 
• Heising et al. [66] (11) 
• Hertog et al. [67] (14) 
• Jedermann et al. [68] (23) 
• Jedermann et al. [69] (29) 
• Laguerre et al. [71] (10) 
• Lang et al. [72] (10) 
• Montanari [73] (12) 
•  Nunes et al. [74] (13) 
• Parfitt et al. [75] (14) 
• Rodríguez-Bermejo et al. [76] 
(9) 
• Rong et al. [77] (11) 
• Ruiz-Garcia et al. [78] (16) 
• Wang and Li [79] (10) 
• Zou et al. [80] (9) 
Current research in cluster 1 
Current research in cluster 2 
TABLE I 
THE 10 MOST FREQUENTLY CITED GENERAL AND TECHNOLOGY-BASED KEYWORDS 
General keywords 
Technology-based keywords 
Keywords 
Frequency 
Keywords 
Frequency 
Keyword 
Frequency 
Keyword 
Frequency 
Cold chain(s) 
89 
Temperature 
57 
Radio 
frequency 
identification (RFID) 
88 
Big data 
24 
Quality 
73 
System 
47 
Internet of Things (IoT) 
64 
Temperature 
sensor 
23 
Traceability 
63 
Management 
45 
Wireless 
sensor 
network 
(WSN) 
53 
Cloud 
computing  
17 
Supply chain 
58 
Shelf life 
42 
Internet 
27 
Industry 4.0 
13 
Food safety 
57 
Storage 
37 
Technology 
26 
Intelligent 
packaging  
8 
 
TABLE II 
CLUSTERING OF THE MOST CITED AUTHORS 
Cluster 1 (689) 
Cluster 2 (309) 
Abad, E. (53) 
Ngai, E.W.T. (18) 
Akyildiz, I.F. (17) 
Kuswandi, B. (18) 
Atzori, I. (20) 
Qi, I. (31) 
Dalgaard P. (16) 
Labuza, T.P. (21) 
Aung, M.M. (43) 
Regattieri, A. (26) 
Giannakourou, M.C. (19) 
Pal, A. (17) 
Badia-Melis, R. (50) 
Ruiz-Garcia, I. (78) 
Gram, I. (17) 
Potyrailo, R.A. (21) 
Barge, P. (15) 
Thakur, M. (21) 
Heising, J.K. (19) 
Raab, V. (16) 
Bosona, T.(17) 
Trebar, M. (19) 
Kerry, J.P. (18) 
Taoukis, P.S. (32) 
Chen, Y.Y. (15) 
Verdouw, C.N. (31) 
Koutsoumanis, K. (27) 
Tsironi, T. (19) 
Costa, C. (25) 
Wang, J.Y. (15) 
Kumar, P. (15) 
Yam, K.L. (17) 
Finkenzeller, K. (18) 
Wang, I.X. (19) 
Cluster 3 (388) 
Kang, Y.S. (21) 
Wang, X. (21) 
Dabbene, F. (22) 
Defraeye, T. (22) 
FAO (20) 
Grubbstrom, R.W. (22) 
Gustavsson, J. (27) 
Hertog, M.L.A.T.M. (25) 
Jedermann, R. (120) 
Kader, A.A. (33) 
Moureh, J. (17) 
Nunes, M.C.N. (63) 
Zou, Z. (17) 
Kelepouris, T. (16) 
Xiao, X.Q. (39) 
Mainetti, I. (19) 
Zhang, J. (23) 
Mejjaouli, S. (16) 
Zhang, Y.F. (20) 
The number of citations is presented between brackets next to the name of the cluster number.  

 
19 
WSN and RFID technologies 
for monitoring temperature  
 
 
•  RFID for mapping temperature (vs 
traditional temperature mapping 
techniques) 
•  Optimal temperature range for multiple 
commodities 
•  WSN and RFID for temperature 
measurements 
•  WSN and RFID for product-specific 
history recording 
•  CC predictor software for optimized CC 
management 
•  IoT technology-RFID embeddedness for 
temperature evaluation in smart CC 
•  Financial viability of RFID application 
Statistical tools for product quality and 
shelf-life prediction 
•  Intelligent packaging for 
shelf-life modelling in 
warehouse management 
•  Deterministic and stochastic 
modelling of early product 
characteristics and operating 
conditions 
•  Modelling optimal managerial 
practices to curb CC costs 
•  Mixed-integer linear 
programming modelling for 
improved CC distribution 
systems 
 
Technological architecture and 
infrastructure for temperature 
monitoring  
•  Cloud-centric vision for IoT 
implementation 
•  RFID-based CC simulation modelling 
•  Algorithm-based temperature and 
humidity management for freshness 
•  IoT architecture for enabling information 
systems 
•  CC shelf-life decision support system for 
CC management 
•  WSN for cold storage and transport 
conditions 
•  CC monitoring and modulating systems 
Intelligent food logistics for longer-lasting 
product quality 
•  RFID-based estimation of the 
expiry date and remaining 
shelf-life 
•  WSN for communications in 
the agri-food sector 
•  Dynamic product quality 
assessment framework for CC 
Cluster 3: Intelligent packaging 16 (189 Citations) 
Cluster 4: Real-time traceability and related challenges (204 Citations) 
• Bibi et al. [81] (11) 
• Costa et al. [82] (18) 
• Finkenzeller [83] (9) 
• Ghaani et al. [84] (9) 
• Giannakourou et al. [85] (9) 
• Jedermann et al. [86] (13) 
• Kerry et al. [87] (16) 
• Koutsoumanis et al. [88] (13) 
 
• Kumar et al. [89] (12) 
• Kuswandi et al. [90] (9) 
• Pacquit et al. [91] (10) 
• Papetti et al. [92] (9) 
• Taoukis and Labuza [93] (15) 
• Vanderroost et al. [94] (11) 
• Yam et al. [95] (13) 
• Zhang et al. [96] (12) 
• Abad et al. [97] (49) 
• Angeles [98] (9) 
• Aung et al. [99] (21) 
• Badia-Melis et al. [100] (9) 
• Barge et al. [101] (11) 
• Bosona and Gebresenbet [102] (16) 
• Feng et al. [103] (9) 
• Kelepouris et al. [104] (14) 
• Regattieri et al. [105] (23) 
• Ruiz-Garcia and Lunadei 
[106] (18) 
• Storøy et al. [107] (9) 
• Wang et al. [108] (16) 
Current research in cluster 3 
Current research in cluster 4 
New technologies and 
applications of smart 
packaging 
 
 
 
 
•  Developments in smart packaging 
devices 
• Commercial time-temperature indicators 
• Electronic-tracing systems 
• Electronic fresh food spoilage indicators 
• RFID for traceability and stock rotation 
 
Real-time traceability capabilities 
•  RFID smart tags for real-time 
traceability and monitoring 
•  Tech-enabled traceability for 
product safety and quality 
•  Issues related to RFID 
technologies implementation 
in the supply chain 
• Real-time monitoring and 
decision support systems for 
CC delivery 
• Standards, principles, and 
good practices for traceability 
information 
• RFID applications in extreme 
environments 
Nomological framework of 
intelligent packaging 
 
 
 
• Technical and commercial 
implementation of intelligent packaging 
• Concepts, terms, components, and 
principles of RFID systems for packaging 
• Active and intelligent packaging 
technologies 
Societal and commercial implications of 
real-time traceability 
•  Legal and regulatory 
considerations on perishable 
products’ traceability 
• Information acquisition, 
transformation, and 
transmission process 
•  Legal, technological and 
social considerations 
underpinning efficient CC 
traceability systems 
• Benefits of advanced 
traceability systems for 
consumers 
 
 
 
TABLE IV 

 
20 
THE PROPOSED CLUSTER CLASSIFICATION WITH CURRENT AND FUTURE RESEARCH PER CLUSTER 
Cluster number 
and cluster label 
Current research 
Future research suggestions 
Cluster 1 
Technology for 
temperature 
monitoring 
WSN and RFID technologies for 
monitoring temperature 
• 
Prioritize the development of technical capacities of WSN 
• 
Financially viable application of RFID in traceability systems  
• 
Energy-efficient applications of WSN and RFID 
Technological architecture and 
infrastructure for temperature 
monitoring 
• 
Distributed architectures underpinning WSN and RFID applications without centralized 
control and goal-setting processes 
• 
Improve protocols about RFID and WSN 
Cluster 2 
Product quality 
and self-life 
prediction 
Statistical tools for product quality 
and shelf-life prediction 
• 
Embedding tools in broader strategically oriented decision support systems 
• 
Integrating prescriptive data analytics 
Intelligent food logistics for longer-
lasting product quality 
• 
Chain-wide propensity to contribute to information-sharing systems 
Cluster 3 
Smart packaging 
New technologies and applications 
of smart packaging 
• 
Multi-functionality in smart packaging 
• 
Improvements in the technological prowess of intelligent packaging 
Nomological framework of 
intelligent packaging 
• 
Financial considerations surrounding intelligent packaging 
• 
Educating consumers about intelligent systems 
• 
Nurture public and social confidence in the security of intelligent packaging 
Cluster 4 
Real-time 
traceability 
Real-time traceability capabilities 
• 
Distributed and algorithm-driven food traceability solutions in the CC 
• 
Development of comprehensive frameworks for food traceability 
Commercial sustainability and 
societal implications of real-time 
traceability 
• 
Consumers’ awareness, acceptance, preferences, usage, and willingness to pay a premium 
for traceable food 
• 
Application of product lifetime extension strategies to intelligent devices within CC 4.0 
• 
Role of consumers in product lifetimes extension strategies 
• 
Gauge public opinion regarding food traceability from production to consumption 
 
 
 
 
FIGURES 
 
Fig. 1. Distribution of articles based on the methodology. 
 
 
Fig. 2. Year-wise growth pattern of CC 4.0 research. 
 
 
 
230
165
77
44
32
32
26
12
0
50
100
150
200
250
Experimental
Conceptual
Survey
Mixed
Number of papers
1
0
0
0
0
0
3
2
3
1
2
1
2
4
4
5 11 20 21 19 20 26 27 36
56
72
84
70
81
47
0
20
40
60
80
100
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
Number of Articles 
Publication Year

 
21 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 3. The co-citation network of the most co-cited authors. 
 
 
Fig. 4. Co-citation network of most co-cited articles. 
 
Cluster 2 
1. 
Wireless sensor network for data transmission (e.g.,I.F.Akyildiz) 
2. 
Shelf-life decision support systems (e.g., M.C. Giannakourou) 
3. 
Intelligent packaging for product quality (e.g., J.K. Heising) 
4. 
New packaging technologies (e.g., J.P. Kerry) 
5. 
Nanotechnology and sensor trends for product quality (e.g., B. Kuswandi) 
6. 
CC database development and modelling (e.g., PS. Taoukis) 
Cluster 1 
1. 
RFID-centric traceability 
and CC monitoring (e.g., 
E. Abad) 
2. 
CC 4.0 systems (e.g., R. 
Badia-Melis) 
3. 
IoT-based virtual supply 
chains (e.g., C.N. 
Verdouw) 
4. 
Technology for 
perishables (e.g., I. Ruiz-
Garcia) 
Cluster 3 
1. 
Intelligent food 
logistics (e.g., R. 
Jedermann) 
2. 
Smart packaging, 
product and quality 
(e.g., A.A. Kader) 
3. 
Virtual CC methods 
(e.g., T. Defraeye) 
4. 
Shelf life modelling 
(e.g., M.L.A.T.M. 
Hertog)