Occupancy-Driven Energy Management
for Smart Building Automation
Yuvraj Agarwal, Bharathan Balaji, Rajesh Gupta, Jacob Lyles, Michael Wei, Thomas Weng
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
University of California, San Diego
{yuvraj, bbalaji, jlyles, gupta, mwei, tweng}@ cs.ucsd.edu
Abstract
Buildings are among the largest consumers of electricity
in the US. A signiﬁcant portion of this energy use in build-
ings can be attributed to HVAC systems used to maintain
comfort for occupants. In most cases these building HVAC
systems run on ﬁxed schedules and do not employ any ﬁne
grained control based on detailed occupancy information. In
this paper we present the design and implementation of a
presence sensor platform that can be used for accurate occu-
pancy detection at the level of individual ofﬁces. Our pres-
ence sensor is low-cost, wireless, and incrementally deploy-
able within existing buildings. Using a pilot deployment of
our system across ten ofﬁces over a two week period we
identify signiﬁcant opportunities for energy savings due to
periods of vacancy. Our energy measurements show that our
presence node has an estimated battery lifetime of over ﬁve
years, while detecting occupancy accurately. Furthermore,
using a building simulation framework and the occupancy
information from our testbed, we show potential energy sav-
ings from 10% to 15% using our system.
Categories and Subject Descriptors
C.3 [Special-Purpose and Application-Based Sys-
tems]: Real-time and Embeded Systems; J.7 [Computers
in Other Systems]: [Industrial control]
General Terms
Design, Management, Human Factors
Keywords
Occupancy Detection System, Wireless Sensor Network,
HVAC Control System
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the ﬁrst page. To copy otherwise, to republish, to post on servers or to redistribute
to lists, requires prior speciﬁc permission and/or a fee.
BuildSys 2010 November 2, 2010, Zurich, Switzerland.
Copyright c⃝2010 ACM 978-1-4503-0458-0/10/11/02...$10.00
1
Introduction
Buildings are known to be one of the largest consumers
of electricity; the US Department of Energy estimates that
buildings consume 70% of the electricty in the US [9]. Re-
cent efforts have focused on making buildings more en-
ergy efﬁcient, including research that target speciﬁc areas
such as HVAC [10][12], lighting [8] and managing IT en-
ergy consumption [2][1] within buildings. The energy us-
age in a building can typically be divided amongst several
subsystems, including plug loads, lighting, and mechani-
cal equipment used for climate control [14].
Mechanical
equipment includes the combined heating, ventilation, and
air-conditioning (HVAC) loads and constitutes a signiﬁcant
amount of energy consumption.
Therefore HVAC systems are a prime target for optimiza-
tion using dynamic control algorithms that can be imple-
mented using a deeply coupled network of sensors (to mea-
sure environmental parameters such as temperature) and ac-
tuators (to affect the environment such as fans and chillers).
Traditionally, most HVAC systems use only temperature and
humidity as the primary inputs in determining cooling re-
quirements [4]. This limitation can often lead to inefﬁcient
energy usage. For example, a room might be cooled to 22.9C
regardless of whether there are any occupants.
In this paper we show that incorporating additional inputs
to the HVAC controller is critical for increasing its energy ef-
ﬁciency. We believe that one of the key inputs to drive HVAC
systems is ﬁne grained occupancy information.
Unfortu-
nately, most occupancy sensors currently installed within
buildings are fairly coarse-grained and inaccurate. Further-
more, these occupancy sensors are usually local in scope and
only control lighting. Passive infrared (PIR) based sensors
are often used (especially with local lighting) for occupancy;
however, by itself PIR is limited to movement and does not
detect actual occupancy in a given area. More advanced sys-
tems have been deployed, such as using cameras and vision
algorithms, but these systems suffer from deployability, cost
and privacy issues. In order to maximize the energy savings
and spur rapid adoption we believe it is imperative to have
an occupancy detection system that is accurate, inexpensive
and easily deployable within existing buildings.
This paper focuses on an occupancy detection system that
we have implemented with these goals in mind and its evalu-
ation in terms of energy savings. We ﬁrst describe the design
of our low-cost wireless occupancy sensor with an empha-
1

Jun 14 2010
Jun 16 2010
Jun 18 2010
Jun 20 2010
Jun 22 2010
Jun 24 2010
Jun 26 2010
50
100
150
200
Power Usage (kW)
Plug Load
Machine Room Load
Lighting Load
HVAC Load (Electrical)
HVAC Load (Thermal)
Figure 1. Detailed energy-use breakdown of the CSE department building for 2 weeks in June 2010. The HVAC loads
have been broken down into two categories: ‘electrical’ such as pumps, chillers, fans and ‘thermal’ as denoted by the
amount of heat taken out from the campus chilled water loop, expressed in KW.
sis on accurate occupancy detection. We then describe our
wireless network infrastructure used to collect occupancy in-
formation. We evaluate our system in terms of accuracy and
energy-efﬁciency and show that not only is our wireless oc-
cupancy system low-cost, it can accurately detect the pres-
ence/absence of occupants in individual ofﬁces. Finally, we
evaluate our HVAC control system using Energy Plus, and
quantify how occupancy information provided by our sens-
ing platform can be used to reduce building energy use by
10% to 15%, and possibly more depending on the actual
HVAC system.
2
Background
Using occupancy as a driver for intelligent control of
HVAC and lighting systems has been explored previously.
Prior research in HVAC control systems shows that occu-
pancy information can be used to drive a more optimized
HVAC schedule [15][20]. However, due to the difﬁculty in
obtaining real time accurate occupancy data, many of these
techniques focus on using pre-determined schedules. Many
modern buildings use passive infrared sensors (PIR) to drive
lighting; the PIR sensors are connected directly to local light-
ing ﬁxtures and are rarely used for intelligent HVAC man-
agement. These PIR sensors are also simple movement sen-
sors and often cannot actually determine if the room is oc-
cupied or not. Thus most use a timeout for shutting off the
lights (30 minutes is common) which can be sub-optimal.
Other methods for detecting occupancy include using sonar-
based methods [17] or camera based systems [18] that bring
up concerns relating to cost, deployment and privacy issues.
CO2-based occupancy detection has also been examined -
the main limitation of these systems is that they are very slow
to detect events such as incoming people [19].
Many modern buildings already contain a limited number
of wired sensors as part of a wired control system such as
BACnet or LonWorks. A major barrier to more widespread
deployment of sensors, however, is installation costs due to
the need for additional wiring for each sensor. The advent of
low-cost wireless sensor networks has enabled wider deploy-
ment opportunities of a large number of connected sensors
[11] thus allowing for improved sensing (such as occupancy
detection) in buildings. Padmanabh et al., for example, in-
vestigated using microphones and PIR sensors to drive more
efﬁcient scheduling of conference rooms [16]. Delaney et
al. used PIR based wireless occupancy sensors to measure
wasted energy in lighting even when there are no occupants
[8]. These efforts however neither use occupancy informa-
tion to drive actual systems nor evaluate accuracy of their
detection sensor. Erickson et al. proposed a wireless net-
work of cameras (which have the aforementioned privacy
and cost issues) to determine real-time occupancy across a
larger area in a building [10], focusing more towards coarse-
grained ﬂoor-level occupancy detection.
Several efforts have looked at using occupancy data in
the context of a home, as opposed to a mixed-use build-
ing. Gao et al. sought to use coarse occupancy data (leave
home, return home) to drive a self-programming home ther-
mostat [12]; however the focus is on the thermostat self-
programming algorithms, and not on obtaining accurate oc-
cupancy. Barbato et al. used PIR sensing to determine oc-
cupancy in their smart building system; once again the focus
was on algorithms supporting user proﬁles [5]. In either case,
the scenario of a home (with a few occupants) as compared
to a large building (with many occupants) is very different.
In order to quantify the potential savings that an occu-
pancy driven HVAC system can have over a traditional sys-
tem, we needed to measure the total energy used by the
HVAC system as a fraction of the entire building energy
use.
At UC San Diego, we have instrumented the Com-
puter Science and Engineering (CSE) building with several
electricity and thermal submeters as part of our campus-
wide Energy Dashboard effort [3]. The CSE building is a
typical mixed-use building with people and supporting IT
infrastructure. Completed in 2005, it is one of the newer
buildings on the UCSD campus. As a result CSE was de-
signed with energy efﬁciency in mind and hence uses tech-
niques such as dynamic window shading, centralized venti-
lation and cooling/heating thermal requirements driven from
a campus-wide chilled/hot water loop.
Figure 1 illustrates the energy use breakdown for the CSE
building over two weeks in June 2010. We provide the break-
down of CSE in terms of several subsystems: ‘Machine
Room Load’ which includes the energy consumed by the
servers and the server room cooling fans, ‘Plug Load’ which
mostly includes PCs and IT equipment plugged into the wall
sockets, ‘Lighting Load’ and ﬁnally the ‘HVAC load’. The
HVAC related loads are divided into two categories: ‘HVAC
2

PIR Sensor
CC2530 SoC Board
Reed Switch
Prototype Case 
Figure 2. Picture of the Synergy occupancy sensor node.
(Electrical)’ which denotes the electricity used to drive the
mechanical and air handling equipment such as fans, pumps
and dampers while the ‘HVAC (Thermal)’ load denotes the
amount of heat transferred to the campus chilled water loop
to cool the air. Since the thermal energy to cool (and heat) the
building is derived from the campus chilled (hot) water loop,
we convert the thermal load, measured in MMBTUs, into
KW required to produce equivalent refrigeration using the
campus central heat-exchanging plant (which has an overall
efﬁciency of 0.9KW/tonne of refrigeration).
As can be observed from Figure 1, more than 50% of the
CSE electrical load is IT related – ‘Plug Load’ and the ‘Ma-
chine Room Load’. Lighting consumes another 10% to 14%
of the baseline electrical usage. Interestingly, the HVAC re-
lated electrical loads (HVAC-Electrical) exhibits large varia-
tions and consume between 9% to 22% of the baseline elec-
tricity usage. The ﬁgure shows that this load is managed
fairly well since during the nights and weekends (low occu-
pancy) it goes down to less than 25kW as compared to during
the weekdays (high occupancy) when the load is often close
to 100kW. However, the ‘HVAC thermal’ load remains be-
tween 110kW to 175kW even during nights and weekends.
A large portion of this is due to the cooling load required
by the machine room servers (close to a constant 60kW) and
the rise during the weekdays to around 175kW is primarily
due to the cooling requirement in ofﬁces. This data clearly
shows that the HVAC system consumes signiﬁcant energy
and using occupancy information to drive HVAC reduction
can lead to substantial energy and cost savings.
3
Building Occupancy System
Our design of an occupancy detection system for build-
ings was based around several key objectives.
First, we
wanted to make the system as low cost as possible to spur
deployment across a building wide scale, and as a result we
aimed to keep the bill of materials for each node low. Sec-
ond, we wanted the system to be incrementally deployable
within existing buildings, without requiring large scale mod-
iﬁcations such as new wiring. Finally, the occupancy de-
tection algorithms should be very accurate since it is key
in minimizing false-positives (which increases energy use),
and more importantly false-negatives (which may lead to dis-
comfort) when controlling the HVAC system.
Synergy Presence Node Design: Based on the above re-
quirements we chose to build our occupancy platform us-
ing a combination of sensors: a magnetic reed switch door
sensor and a PIR sensor module. As we show later in our
evaluation, using these two sensors enabled highly accurate
occupancy detection. For deployability reasons, the natu-
ral choice was to use a wireless solution. We chose the TI
CC2530 System-on-Chip since it integrates an 8051 micro
controller core with an 802.15.4 standard compatible radio
in a small footprint and low-cost package. We have based
our presence platform on the TI reference design, with some
changes to accommodate our sensors. For cost reasons we
used a printed antenna on the PCB itself and brought out
several GPIOs that connect to the reed switch, which gets
triggered by a small magnet attached to the door to each in-
dividual ofﬁce. The board is powered off using three off-the-
shelf AA 2850 mAH alkaline batteries. The board, batteries
and the sensors are all placed in a case that we have fabri-
cated. Figure 2 shows a photo of our prototype and the en-
closure mounted ﬂush with the door frame. Keeping in mind
the design goal of making our platform low cost, the total
bill of material per node (in quantities of 1000) is under 15$
including the cost of the CC2531 chip, sensors and the cost
of fabricating the PCB.
Occupancy Detection Algorithm:
We use the reed
switch and the PIR sensors together to improve the accuracy
of occupancy detection. The reed switch and the PIR sensor
are both connected to interrupt-enabled GPIO pins on the
CC2530 micro controller. The reed switch is able to sense
when the door is open or closed. When the door is open, we
mark the room as occupied. This is based on the fact that for
a typical ofﬁce building an open door denotes the occupant
being in the ofﬁce or being somewhere nearby. Similarly
when people leave an extended period of time (such as the
end of the day) they typically close the door to their ofﬁces
for security reasons.
When a door close event happens, there are two possibili-
ties. Either the person closed the door and headed out (room
unoccupied) or the person just closed the door and is still
inside the room (room occupied). To disambiguate between
these two cases we use the PIR sensor to determine if some-
one walked near the door. If the PIR sensor goes high this
means that there is still a person in the room and we mark
the room as occupied. If the PIR sensor does not detect mo-
tion, then we decide that there is no occupant in the room.
PIR sensors do exhibit some noise, and the air currents of a
passing person may cause it to trigger. To compensate we
have developed a simple algorithm that will ignore the ﬁrst
six seconds of pulses from the PIR sensor and sample con-
stantly for two seconds after that. We map the pulses to the
pulse pattern of a passing occupant compared to no occupant
to determine if there is a person in the room or not.
There is one scenario where we will incorrectly declare
a closed room to be unoccupied.
If a visitor closes the
door while the main occupant of a room is sitting still at his
desk (such as typing on the computer), the PIR sensor will
likely not detect movement and thus determine to room to be
empty. To compensate, we turn on the PIR interrupt when-
ever we mark a room as closed and unoccupied. If we detect
movement the CC2530 will wake up, poll the PIR and check
3

SNR (dBm)
>35 dBm
25-35 dBm
15-25 dBm
5-15 dBm
1-5 dBm
<1 dBm
Base Station
Node
Figure 3. Layout of our test deployment.
the resultant pulse pattern for occupancy. If it passes, we de-
termine the room to be actually occupied. While we assume
that an open door means the room is occupied, we have also
developed an algorithm that does not make that assumption.
In buildings where open doors do not necessarily mean oc-
cupied, we revert to determining occupancy by using a 30
minute timeout, similar to how PIR-only sensors are run.
Our sensor module shares some similarities with a com-
mercial sensor manufactured by Honeywell [13], which also
uses a door sensor coupled with a PIR sensor. However this
sensor is limited to only interacting with a remote setback de-
vice over a proprietary wireless protocol and is speciﬁcally
meant for local control of a home-based HVAC system. It
also requires signiﬁcantly higher installation costs and is not
meant for larger commercial buildings.
Wireless Network and Occupancy Server: We have de-
signed our wireless network infrastructure as a tiered topol-
ogy.
Each of our wireless Synergy presence nodes com-
municate with their local base station over the 802.15.4 ra-
dio using the ZigBee protocol. While there are other op-
tions such as 6LoWPAN, we chose ZigBee because the stack
is provided by TI free of cost and is certiﬁed by the Zig-
Bee Alliance. The wall-powered base stations are imple-
mented as low-power small form factor PCs with a similar
CC2530 based radio plugged in over USB. The network is
self-organizing. When a Synergy presence node powers on,
it automatically connects to the nearest base station with the
preset parameters (a speciﬁc extended PID and cluster ID).
Once connected it will send occupancy data to its parent base
station.
There can be multiple base stations on a ﬂoor of a large
building, and each base stations is connected to the building
backbone network using either Wi-Fi or Ethernet. Although
the base stations are capable of doing some pre-processing
with the occupancy data (such as algorithms to control a se-
ries of actuators in a speciﬁc location), they currently act as
relays to send the data received from the Synergy presence
nodes to a central server (a DELL PowerEdge R700). A pro-
cess on the server then stores the data into a central database.
We can then analyze the occupancy data in real time to de-
termine the appropriate actuator actions. For example, in our
HVAC control system the two options are to run the HVAC
system to achieve a set point temperature when the particu-
lar ofﬁce is occupied, or reduce cooling to drift to the setback
temperature during unoccupied periods.
We have written an application that does just this, but
do not currently interface directly with the building HVAC
7/26/2010
7/28/2010
7/30/2010
8/1/2010
8/3/2010
8/5/2010
Profes
sor
Graduate 
Student 
Researcher 
Shared 
Office 
Professor 
Figure 4. Occupancy over ten days for an example set of
four rooms.
system to perform actuations based on occupancy since that
could potentially lead to user annoyances during our experi-
mentation phase. We are however investigating mechanisms
that would allow interfacing, on a limited scale of a sin-
gle ﬂoor, with the MetaSys building management system.
Meanwhile, we use this occupancy information as inputs to a
detailed simulation framework that we have built to quantify
the expected energy savings as described in the next section.
We have also implemented a website that allows this occu-
pancy information to be observed in real time using the ﬂoor
plan of our building. Due to the expected privacy issues that
may arise, we have currently restricted access to this website
to the building administrators in case it is needed for emer-
gency response conditions.
4
Results and Evaluation
In this section we describe the results of our pilot deploy-
ment of the Synergy presence nodes. We then evaluate our
system for accuracy and energy consumption. We ﬁnally
simulate the deployment using EnergyPlus in order to quan-
tify the potential energy savings of using our Synergy pres-
ence detection system.
4.1
Test Deployment and Results
We deployed our system across one of the wings of the
CSE building and collected data for several ofﬁces over two
weeks. Figure 3 shows the ﬂoor layout with the Synergy
presence nodes marked. The rooms that were monitored in-
clude several faculty ofﬁces, two shared student ofﬁces, a
small workshop laboratory, a computer room, and a small
conference room. Figure 4 shows the occupancy data col-
lected for several of those rooms over ten days at the end
of July. As this data was recorded in the summer, the oc-
cupancy patterns will be different from the school year, but
some interesting observations can still be seen. Professors
tended to be absent for long stretches of time, which sup-
ports the theory that it is always hard to ﬁnd one’s advisor.
Shared ofﬁces tended to be occupied for long periods of time,
as someone was likely to be in it. Almost all the occupants
would leave their ofﬁces for an hour or more for lunch or
meetings several days of the week. Throughout each day,
there were still many periods of vacancy for all of the de-
ployed rooms. These large periods of unoccupancy suggest
that occupancy can be an effective driver of HVAC systems.
4

9:36
14:24
19:12
0:00
4:48
9:36
Synergy 
Node 
PIR Only 
Actual  
Occupancy 
Figure 5.
Graph showing accuracy of our system vs.
ground truth and the PIR-only node.
4.2
Accuracy
Detailed accurate occupancy information is critical in or-
der to achieve any occupancy-driven control system. Over
two days we constantly monitored the hallway to record the
actual occupancy for each of the rooms. This gives us ground
truth with which to compare our sensor readings. In order to
compare our system with commonly deployed PIR sensors,
we also monitor the room with a PIR-only sensor using a 30
minute timeout (the sensor will consider the room occupied
up to 30 minutes after the last detected movement).
Figure 5 compares the actual occupancy with our Synergy
presence and the PIR-only sensor node. We notice that our
sensor node matches the actual occupancy well, with the ex-
ception of periods where the occupant leaves the room for
a few minutes but leaves his door open. We also see a few
instances where the sensor detected an unoccupied room that
was actually occupied. This happened because a visiting stu-
dent closed the door of the ofﬁce while the occupant was on
his computer. It was not until a few minutes later that the
PIR interrupted the CC2530 and the Synergy sensor node
detected the occupant.
The PIR-only sensor is considerably less accurate, mark-
ing the room as occupied for long periods when the room is
actually unoccupied. Also for small periods of time, the PIR-
only sensor actually marks the room as unoccupied when
there is still an occupant. This can happen when the occu-
pant remains relatively still (such as typing at a computer)
for a long period of time. The PIR-only sensor will not detect
the movement and thus assume that the room is unoccupied
after 30 minutes of inactivity. Note, the timeout period can
of course be adjusted, but a trade off occurs between greater
energy savings and inconveniencing the occupant.
4.3
Energy Consumption and RF Range
To ease deployability our presence nodes are wireless
and battery powered, which requires careful consideration
of their energy consumption to ensure long lifetimes. Our
choice of components, including the CC2531 SoC, the PIR
and the reed sensor, reﬂect that goal as all of these parts have
low power consumption. We utilized the deep sleep modes
supported by the CC2531 micro controller extensively, and
made sure that the presence nodes operate at low duty cycles
(we use an interrupt driven architecture as opposed to polling
the sensors constantly). We measured the current consump-
tion of our sensor using a FLUKE digital multimeter. In deep
sleep mode the entire presence node consumes 30uA at 4.5V.
On detecting any activity, the PIR sensor consumes 350uA.
Furthermore, if an event is detected, the sensors wakeup the
CC2531 to process the event and transmit a packet to the base
station, and the power consumption rises to 29mA for the
duration of the transmission. Conservatively, if a presence
sensor has to detect 50 events during each day, we calculate
a battery lifetime of 7.27 years using our current 2850mAh
batteries based on these measurements, which exceeds the
lifetime of the battery itself.
Since we opt for a low-cost PCB antenna, the radio range
will be limited compared to a more costly antenna. To deter-
mine the range, we measured the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR)
from the node to the base station using the reported values
from the CC2530 to determine base station coverage. Below
5 dBm, the connection between the base station and the node
became unreliable and intermittent. Above 15 dBm, the con-
nection was stable and maintained a consistent throughput
of about 7 KB/s. Our analysis shows that a single base sta-
tion sufﬁces to cover 1/3 of a ﬂoor in the building (Figure 3),
and therefore we believe three to four base stations will be
enough to provide coverage to an entire ﬂoor.
4.4
Simulation
In order to demonstrate the beneﬁts of our Synergy pres-
ence system, we simulate an example building along with
its HVAC energy consumption. We use EnergyPlus, which
is the US Dept of Energy’s next-generation building energy
simulation program [7] that improves on previous simula-
tors such as BLAST and DOE-2.2 [6]. EnergyPlus allows
the user to model a building, deﬁne thermal/HVAC zones,
and incorporate various HVAC systems. The user also spec-
iﬁes schedules that detail occupancy, control set points, and
other internal loads that affect heat gain. With the input data
deﬁned, EnergyPlus can simulate thermal conditions for the
building and its zones and the HVAC operations required to
maintain the temperatures in the building.
4.4.1
Simulation Parameters
We model a simple single ﬂoor building that mirrors the
ﬂoor plan of our deployed wing of the CSE building (the sim-
ulated building contains several ofﬁces, a conference room,
some shared labs/ofﬁces, and an outside hallway area). The
occupancy rates for the ofﬁces and lab rooms in the simula-
tion come from the occupancy data we collected in our de-
ployment. We simulate this building for HVAC energy costs
using both a baseline mode where HVAC is turned on during
working hours the entire time at 22.9C and our HVAC con-
trol system that turns on the system when there is occupancy
and throttles it back when there is no detected occupancy.
We set a temperature for 22.9C for occupied operation and
26.1C for the setback. The actual HVAC system we model
is an idealized air-ﬂow that assumes perfect efﬁciency. We
simulate this building over four months in the summer using
a weather ﬁle from a typical warm city.
4.4.2
Simulation Results
Our results are shown in Figure 6. The graph shows that
the daily HVAC savings using our occupancy system is be-
tween 10% to 15%. The variations depend on the speciﬁc
temperature for that day.
The signiﬁcant energy savings
5

0.00%
2.00%
4.00%
6.00%
8.00%
10.00%
12.00%
14.00%
16.00%
18.00%
20.00%
 06/01
 06/07
 06/13
 06/19
 06/25
 07/01
 07/07
 07/13
 07/19
 07/25
 07/31
 08/06
 08/12
 08/18
 08/24
 08/30
 09/05
 09/11
 09/17
 09/23
 09/29
Percentage Savings on Cooling 
Date 
Figure 6. Graph showing energy savings using our occu-
pancy system over the summer.
come from the fact that the building can save energy when a
room is not occupied by lowering cooling. Our control pro-
cedure was merely to throttle back cooling to 26.1, however
more aggressive and optimized HVAC operation schemes
can be implemented that will save even more energy. The ac-
tual amount of energy savings depends on the building con-
struction, speciﬁc HVAC system being used, the occupancy
schedule, and many other factors, but regardless of the spe-
ciﬁc parameters, our simulations show that the opportunity
for savings is clearly there. Given that HVAC related loads
consumes over 400 kW in our CSE building, a 15% reduc-
tion will lead to an estimated savings of 480 kWh over an 8
hour day.
5
Conclusions and Future Work
In this paper we have presented the design and imple-
mentation of a low-cost and incrementally deployable occu-
pancy detection system using battery operated wireless sen-
sor nodes. Our evaluation across a ten room initial deploy-
ment shows that our choice of sensors and occupancy de-
tection algorithm can detect occupancy accurately. Using
this occupancy information as input to a simulation model
of a building, we show that the HVAC energy consumption
can in fact be reduced from 10% to 15% using our system.
We also believe that the actual energy savings might even
be greater with more aggressive control algorithms that can
utilize the occupancy information provided by our sensors to
duty-cycle HVAC systems further. Going forward we will
expand our sensor package to account for people counting,
not just binary occupancy data. We are also actively looking
into robust privacy controls.
6
Acknowledgments
We wish to thank Robert Austin, Walter Richardson, and
John Dilliott at UCSD Physical Plant Services who assisted
with the energy calculations. We would also like to thank
Jawon Lee for her assistance in setting up the servers. This
work is supported by Multiscale Systems Center (MuSyc)
under the Focus Center Research Program (FCRP) sup-
ported by DARPA/MARCO and also NSF CCF/SHF Grant
1018632.
7
References
[1] Y. Agarwal, S. Hodges, R. Chandra, J. Scott, P. Bahl, and R. Gupta.
Somniloquy: Augmenting Network Interfaces to Reduce PC Energy
Usage. In Proceedings of USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems
Design and Implementation (NSDI ’09), 2009.
[2] Y. Agarwal, S. Savage, and R. Gupta. SleepServer: A Software-Only
Approach for Reducing the Energy Consumption of PCs within En-
terprise Environments. In Proceedings of USENIX Annual Technical
Symposium (USENIX ATC ’10), 2010.
[3] Y. Agarwal, T. Weng, and R. Gupta. The Energy Dashboard: Improv-
ing the Visibility of Energy Consumption at a Campus-Wide Scale.
In First ACM Workshop on Embedded Sensing Systems For Energy-
Efﬁciency In Buildings, 2009.
[4] ASHRAE. ASHRAE Standard 90.1-2004.
[5] A. Barbato, L. Borsani, A. Capone, and S. Melzi. Home energy saving
through a user proﬁling system based on wireless sensors. Conference
On Embedded Networked Sensor Systems, pages 49–54, 2009.
[6] D. Crawley, J. Hand, M. Kummert, and B. Grifﬁth. Comparison of
Capabilities of 20 Building Simulation Programs.
[7] D. Crawley, L. Lawrie, and et. al. Energyplus, a new-generation build-
ing energy simulation program. In Proceedings of the Renewable and
Advanced Energy Systems for the 21st Century, April 1999.
[8] D. T. Delaney, G. M. P. O’Hare, and A. G. Ruzzelli. Evaluation of
energy-efﬁciency in lighting systems using sensor networks. Proceed-
ings of the First ACM Workshop on Embedded Sensing Systems for
Energy-Efﬁciency in Buildings, pages 61–66, 2009.
[9] DOE. Buildings Energy Data Book, Department of Energy, March
2009. http://buildingsdatabook.eren.doe.gov/.
[10] V. L. Erickson, Y. Lin, A. Kamthe, R. Brahme, A. Surana, A. E. Cerpa,
M. D. Sohn, and S. Narayanan. Energy efﬁcient building environment
control strategies using real-time occupancy measurements. Proceed-
ings of the First ACM Workshop on Embedded Sensing Systems for
Energy-Efﬁciency in Buildings, pages 19–24, 2009.
[11] D. Estrin, L. Girod, G. Pottie, and M. Srivastava. Instrumenting The
World With Wireless Sensor Networks. In International Conference
on Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing (ICASSP 2001), pages
2033–2036, 2001.
[12] G. Gao and K. Whitehouse. The self-programming thermostat: op-
timizing setback schedules based on home occupancy patterns. Pro-
ceedings of the First ACM Workshop on Embedded Sensing Systems
for Energy-Efﬁciency in Buildings, pages 67–72, 2009.
[13] Honeywell.
Honeywell WSK-24 Wireless Occupancy Solu-
tion.
http://specifyhoneywell.com/customer/techlit/pdf/
63-0000s/63-4519.pdf.
[14] J. Kleissl and Y. Agarwal. Cyber-Physical Energy Systems: Focus
on Smart Buildings. In Proceedings of the ACM/EDAC/IEEE Design
Automation Conference, 2010.
[15] L. J. Lo and A. Novoselac. Localized air-conditioning with occupancy
control in an open ofﬁce. Energy and Buildings, 2010.
[16] K. Padmanabh, A. M. V, S. Sen, S. P. Katru, A. Kumar, S. P. C, S. K.
Vuppala, and S. Paul. isense: A wireless sensor network based confer-
ence room management system. Proceedings of the First ACM Work-
shop on Embedded Sensing Systems for Energy-Efﬁciency in Build-
ings, pages 37–42, 2009.
[17] S. P. Tarzia, R. P. Dick, P. A. Dinda, and G. Memik. Sonar-based
measurement of user presence and attention. UbiComp, pages 89–92,
2009.
[18] T. Teixeira and A. Savvides. Lightweight people counting and local-
izing for easily deployable indoors wsns. IEEE Journal of Selected
Topics in Signal Processing, 2(4):493–502, August 2008.
[19] S. Wang and X. Jin. Co 2-based occupancy detection for on-line out-
door air ﬂow control. Indoor and Built Environment, 7(3):165–181,
1998.
[20] Y. Zhu, M. Liu, and et. al. Optimization of Control Strategies for
HVAC Terminal Boxes. In Proceedings of 12th Symposium on Im-
proving Building Systems in Hot and Humid Climates.
6