2136
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SMART GRID, VOL. 3, NO. 4, DECEMBER 2012
Performance Analysis and Comparison on
Energy Storage Devices for Smart Building
Energy Management
Zhanbo Xu, Xiaohong Guan, Fellow, IEEE, Qing-Shan Jia, Senior Member, IEEE, Jiang Wu, Member, IEEE,
Dai Wang, and Siyun Chen
Abstract—A smart building energy system usually contains
multiple energy sources such as power grids, autonomous genera-
tors, renewable resources, storage devices, and schedulable loads.
Storage devices such as batteries, ice/heat storage units, and water
tanks play an important role in reducing energy cost in building
energy systems since they can help sufﬁciently utilize renewable
energy resources and time-of-use electricity prices. It is important
to plan, schedule, and coordinate all the storage devices together
with schedulable loads in a building facilitated by microgrid
technology. To consider the above problem with uncertainties in
solar radiation and demand proﬁles, a stochastic optimization
problem is formulated and solved by the scenario tree method.
The best combination and the optimal capacities of storage de-
vices for speciﬁc building energy systems are then determined.
Furthermore, the optimal operating strategy of building energy
systems can be obtained. The performance analysis on the storage
devices is conducted and the numerical results show that thermal
storage devices (e.g., ice storage units, water tanks) are good for
saving energy costs but batteries may not be economical due to
their high investment cost and short lifetime. It is also observed
that the aforementioned uncertainties have an impact on selecting
which type and capacity of storage device should be used.
Index Terms—Building energy saving, mixed integer program-
ming, optimal capacities and types, storage devices.
I. NOMENCLATURE
NIT price of battery (RMB/kWh).
Unit price of heat storage unit (RMB/kWh).
Unit price of ice storage unit (RMB/kWh).
Unit price of water tank
.
Upper lifetime of battery converted to
scheduling horizon.
Manuscript received November 15, 2011; revised May 08, 2012; accepted
September 08, 2012. Date of publication December 20, 2012; date of cur-
rent version December 28, 2012. This work was supported in part by the
Tsinghua-UTC Research Institute for Integrated Building Energy, Safety and
Control System, the United Technologies Research Center, NSFC (60704008,
60736027, 60921003, 61174072, and 90924001), the Specialized Research
Fund for the Doctoral Program of Higher Education (20070003110), the
National 111 International Collaboration Project (B06002), and the TNList
Cross-Disciplinary Research Funding. Paper no. TSG-00637-2011.
Z. Xu, X. Guan, J. Wu, D. Wang, and S. Chen are with the Moe Klinns
Lab of Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, 710049, China (e-mail: zbxu@sei.
xjtu.edu.cn; jwu@sei.xjtu.edu.cn; daiwang@sei.xjtu.edu.cn; sychen@sei.xjtu.
edu.cn; xhguan@xjtu.edu.cn).
X. Guan is also with the Center for Intelligent and Networked Systems
(CFINS), Department of Automation, TNLIST, Tsinghua University, Beijing
100084, China.
Q.-S. Jia is with the CFINS, TNLIST, Department of Automation, Tsinghua
University, Beijing 100084, China (e-mail: jiaqs@tsinghua.edu.cn).
Digital Object Identiﬁer 10.1109/TSG.2012.2218836
Penalty due to using battery during scheduling
horizon (RMB).
Penalty cost when the utilization time of
battery exceed
.
Investment cost of battery (RMB).
Investment cost of heat storage unit (RMB).
Investment cost of ice storage unit (RMB).
Investment cost of water tank (RMB).
Buying price of electricity during
.
Selling price of electricity during
.
Total cost of electricity during
.
Price of natural gas during
.
Total cost of natural gas during
.
Coefﬁcient of performance in refrigeration
mode.
Coefﬁcient of performance in heating mode.
Coefﬁcient of performance in ice-making
mode.
Electrical consumption by auxiliary electric
heater during
.
Electrical consumption in heating mode during
.
Electrical consumption by chiller in
refrigeration mode during
.
Total electrical demand during
.
Electrical consumption by chiller in ice-making
mode during
.
Capacity of battery
.
Time period index,
.
A great positive integer.
Number of solar thermal collectors.
Rated power of auxiliary electric heater (kW).
Battery charge
or discharge
during
.
Maximal discharge rate of battery (kW).
Maximal charge rate of battery (kW).
Minimal charge rate of battery (kW).
1949-3053/$31.00 © 2012 IEEE
Authorized licensed use limited to: Industrial Technology Research Institute. Downloaded on July 22,2025 at 02:36:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

XU et al.: PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS AND COMPARISON ON ENERGY STORAGE DEVICES FOR SMART BUILDING ENERGY MANAGEMENT
2137
Minimal discharge rate of battery (kW).
CCHP power generated during
.
Electrical capacity of CCHP unit (kW).
Rated power of chiller (kW).
Power supplied to loads from grid
during
.
Solar power generated during
.
Power fed into grid
during
.
CCHP cooling generated during
.
Total heating demand during
.
CCHP heat generated during
.
Cooling quantity stored in ice storage unit
during
.
Cooling quantity supplied by ice storage unit
during
.
Heat quantity supplied by heat storage unit
during
.
Heat quantity stored in heat storage unit during
.
Remaining cooling quantity in ice storage unit
during
.
Remaining heat quantity in heat storage unit
during
.
Total cooling demand during
.
Capacity of heat storage unit (kWh).
Capacity of ice storage unit (kWh).
Horizontal solar radiation (kWh).
Scenario index of demand proﬁle,
.
Scenario index of solar radiation,
.
Demanded temperature of hot water
.
Environmental temperature
.
Temperature of municipal water
.
Hot water generated during
.
Natural gas consumed by CCHP during
.
Capacity of water tank
.
Remaining hot water in tank during
.
Demand of hot water during
.
Remaining electrical energy in battery during
.
Lower bound of state of charge (SOC) of
battery.
Upper bound of SOC of battery.
Electrical load ratio of CCHP during
.
Minimal electrical load rate of CCHP.
Maximal electrical load rate of CCHP.
Discrete variable, “1” if utilization time of
battery has not exceeded
during scheduling
horizon, “2” if it exceeds
.
Discrete variable, “1” if battery is charging
during
, “0” otherwise.
Discrete variable, “
” if battery is discharging
during
, “0” otherwise.
Discrete variable, “1” if battery charge is
generating penalty during
, “0” otherwise.
Discrete variable, “
” if battery discharge is
generating penalty during
, “0” otherwise.
if CCHP is started up (or
shut down) during
.
if chiller is in
refrigeration mode (or not) during
.
if chiller is in ice-making
mode (or not) during
.
Discrete variable, “1” if power is supplied to
terminal loads during
, “0” otherwise.
Discrete variable, “1” if power is fed into grid
during
, “0” otherwise.
if cooling is (or not)
supplied by ice storage unit.
Time length of a period (hour).
Efﬁciency of solar thermal collectors.
Efﬁciency of auxiliary electric heater.
Efﬁciency of chiller in ice-making mode.
Loss coefﬁcient of heat storage unit.
Loss heat coefﬁcient.
Loss coefﬁcient of ice storage unit.
Conversion coefﬁcient
.
Density of hot water
.
Probability of
scenario of demand proﬁle.
Probability of
scenario of solar radiation.
II. INTRODUCTION
B
UILDING energy efﬁciency has attracted a lot of re-
search efforts in recent years since buildings use a
signiﬁcant percentage of energy consumption in our modern
society. A building energy system usually consists of multiple
energy sources and media such as power distribution grids, au-
tonomous generators (such as combined cooling, heating, and
power (CCHP) generating units), renewable energy resources
(such as photovoltaic (PV) panels, solar thermal collectors,
and wind power generators), various storage devices (such as
electrical batteries, ice storage units, heat storage units, and
water tanks), and schedulable loads (such as heating, ventila-
tion, and air conditioning (HVAC) systems and room thermal
loads controlled by blinds or opening windows) [1], [2], [4].
Various energy sources and loads (such as electricity, natural
gas, solar power and thermal generation, cooling, and heating)
are correlated or coupled with one another as shown in Fig. 1.
Many efforts have been made in building energy efﬁciency.
Firstly, most studies focus on improving the energy efﬁciency
Authorized licensed use limited to: Industrial Technology Research Institute. Downloaded on July 22,2025 at 02:36:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

2138
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SMART GRID, VOL. 3, NO. 4, DECEMBER 2012
Fig. 1. Multiple energy sources of the building energy system.
of an HVAC system since it uses the most building energy con-
sumption. Huang [1] proposed a method to increase efﬁciency
of the HVAC systems by natural ventilation with information
about the outdoor environment. Li et al. [2] and Braun [3]
showed that an ice storage unit can reduce the operating cost
of an HVAC system and the capacity of a chiller. Secondly,
some research focuses on improving building energy efﬁciency
through integrated control of terminal loads. Sun et al. [4]
showed that integrated terminal control and HVAC systems can
signiﬁcantly save energy while satisfying occupant comfort
requirements. Tzempelikos and Athienitis [5] revealed an
approach to providing the required illuminance and minimizing
the energy cost of the lights by jointly controlling blinds and
lights. Thirdly, some researchers study the utilization of re-
newable energy resources in building energy supply systems
as well as the usage of microgrid technology in improving
energy efﬁciency of building energy supply systems. Mooney
and Kroposki [6] analyzed the potential to save building energy
consumption with renewable energy resources. Guan, Xu, and
Jia [7] revealed a method to improve operation efﬁciency of
building energy systems through microgrid. Marnay et al. [8]
proposed an optimization approach for obtaining the control
strategy of commercial-building microgrids with the distributed
energy resources customer adoption model.
Storage devices play a very important role in reducing energy
consumption and cost in building energy systems since they
can improve the efﬁciency of renewable energy resource util-
ities and the ﬂexibility of time-of-use (TOU) electricity prices.
One of the salient features of building energy systems is that
thermal energy provided by HVAC systems may take more than
40% of the total building energy consumption. However, few ef-
forts were made to study the building energy system integrated
with both thermal and electrical storage devices. In this paper
we focus on planning, scheduling, and coordinating different
storage devices together with other energy devices in a building
energy system facilitated by microgrid technology.
As aforementioned, there are many types of storage devices,
and selecting the appropriate storage devices is very impor-
tant for building energy efﬁciency based on quantitative perfor-
mance analysis and comparison. For the management of these
devices with the TOU electricity price in a microgrid, the goal is
generally to minimize the overall energy cost while satisfying
the occupant demands. This problem is very challenging, and
few efforts have been made to address the difﬁculties in eval-
uating the storage devices in building energy systems. Firstly,
the storage devices couple supply and demand across time and
evaluation of these devices is nested with complicated sched-
uling problems. Secondly, the electrical and thermal demand
proﬁles are uncertain since they are based on uncertain occu-
pant movement and behavior. Meanwhile, the demand proﬁles
are also subject to ﬂuctuation of the outdoor environment. Fur-
thermore, the renewable energy supply, such as solar power and
thermal generation, is highly uncertain due to solar radiation and
weather conditions.
This paper presents a stochastic analysis and optimization
problem for the integrated planning and scheduling of the smart
building energy systems in a microgrid environment. With the
proposed formulation, the best combination and optimal capaci-
ties of storage devices such as electrical batteries and ice storage
units can be obtained at the planning level. This is very impor-
tant to design and allocate the storage devices in a smart building
energy system. The optimal operating strategy of the building
energy system can be obtained at the scheduling level to reduce
energy consumption and cost. To deal with the uncertainties ef-
fectively, the proposed problem is solved by the scenario tree
method using an efﬁcient optimization solver CPLEX, where
the uncertainties in the demand proﬁles and solar radiation are
represented through multiple scenarios.
The numerical testing is performed with the electrical and
thermal demand proﬁles taken from our previous work [4] with
different weather data. The test results show that, with the pro-
posed model and method, the appropriate types and capacities
of storage devices for a speciﬁc building can be effectively de-
termined. Through our performance analysis and comparison
based on the cases for the three typical temperate and subtrop-
ical locations described in the paper, it is found that the thermal
storage devices, such as the ice storage unit and the hot water
tank, are effective in saving energy costs. But with the TOU
electricity price considered in the paper, the current electrical
battery used as energy storage may not be economical enough
due to its high investment costs and short lifetime. The princi-
ples of selecting storage devices are summarized for different
conditions. It is also observed that the uncertainties in demand
and solar radiation proﬁles can inﬂuence determination of the
type and capacity of the storage devices. For example, when the
variance of both solar radiation and demand proﬁles is large,
it would be amenable to use electrical batteries to store excess
solar power.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section III,
the stochastic problem formulation is presented. In Section IV,
the approximate problem is solved by the scenario tree method.
In Section V, the proposed method is tested with various numer-
ical cases, and the results on performance and comparison are
shown. The concluding remarks then follow.
III. PROBLEM FORMULATION
The focus of this paper is to study the performance analysis
of different energy storage devices by investigating the inte-
grated planning-and-scheduling problem coordinated with other
devices in the building energy system while satisfying the oc-
cupant requirements. The energy system considered includes a
power grid, PV panels, solar hot water system (including solar
thermal collectors and an auxiliary electric heater), CCHP unit,
HVAC system, electrical battery, water tank, ice storage unit,
Authorized licensed use limited to: Industrial Technology Research Institute. Downloaded on July 22,2025 at 02:36:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

XU et al.: PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS AND COMPARISON ON ENERGY STORAGE DEVICES FOR SMART BUILDING ENERGY MANAGEMENT
2139
and heat storage unit. The scheduling horizon is
with dis-
crete time periods. The objective is to minimize the overall cost
of electricity, natural gas, and the investment cost of storage de-
vices with TOU electricity prices over the entire lifetime on av-
erage for all scenarios in 8760 hours. The forecasted electrical
and thermal demand proﬁles are assumed by the previous work
[4] with weather data of different locations. A set of scenarios
of demand proﬁles and solar radiation are generated by the fore-
casted ones using their distributions.
The integrated planning-and-scheduling problem is to deter-
mine the type and capacity of the storage devices and the oper-
ating strategies of all energy supplies and storage devices over
the scheduling horizon such that the total cost of electricity, nat-
ural gas, and the investment cost of storage devices is mini-
mized. It is formulated as the following optimization problem:
(1)
subject to the following constraints. For simplicity, the notation
for scenarios of demand proﬁles and solar radiation is dropped,
but the constraints should be satisﬁed for all scenarios.
i) System constraints
Electrical, cooling, and heating energy balance and re-
quirements represent the balance and requirements of var-
ious energy ﬂows between supply and demand. The en-
ergy balance and requirement constraints are shown in
(2)– (4).
1) Electrical energy balance:
(2)
2) Cooling energy requirement:
(3)
In this paper, it is assumed that the heating energy
is provided by the HVAC system in winter and the
heating energy requirement is similar to (3) as shown
in (4).
3) Heating energy requirement:
(4)
ii) Cost of electricity and natural gas
1) Operating state of power grid
(5)
2) Cost of electricity:
(6)
3) Cost of natural gas:
(7)
iii) Investment cost of storage devices
(8)
In this paper, the investment costs of storage devices are
converted to the scheduling horizon with the parameters
obtained from [9], [10] according to their lifetime.
iv) Constraint of battery control
1) Input and output power capacities:
(9)
2) Constraint of SOC:
(10)
3) SOC dynamics:
(11)
4) Initial and last state of SOC:
(12)
5) Constraint of penalty of battery lifetime:
(13)
(14)
where
and
are the assistant parameters
to balance (14) when the state of the battery changes
from charge (discharge) to idle, since this state tran-
sition does not generate penalty.
(15)
Authorized licensed use limited to: Industrial Technology Research Institute. Downloaded on July 22,2025 at 02:36:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

2140
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SMART GRID, VOL. 3, NO. 4, DECEMBER 2012
Since the lifetime of battery is limited, the usage cost
is appended when the utilization time is more than
half of the lifetime.
v) Constraint of CCHP
1) Constraint of operation of CCHP:
(16)
2) Output energy of CCHP:
(17)
3) Consumed rate of natural gas:
(18)
Note that the output energy and natural gas consumed
by CCHP are ﬁtted by a linear function of electric
load rate with operation data.
, , ,
, , and
are
parameters of CCHP and can be obtained by linear ﬁt-
ting [11]; these parameters depend on the rated power
of CCHP.
vi) Constraint of ice storage unit
1) Constraint of chiller mode:
(19)
The chiller can be set to either refrigeration mode
or ice-making mode, and the ice storage unit would
supply the cooling energy when the chiller is not in
ice-making mode.
2) Cooling energy generated in two modes:
(20)
3) Remaining cooling dynamics in ice storage unit:
(21)
vii) Constraint of heat storage unit
1) Heating energy generated in heating mode:
(22)
2) Remaining heating dynamics in heat storage unit:
(23)
viii) Constraint of solar hot water system
1) Power capacities of auxiliary electric heater:
(24)
2) Remaining water dynamics:
(25)
(26)
3) Water production of solar hot water system:
(27)
ix) Constraint of PV panels [12]
1) Electric power output of PV panels:
A PV module is composed of PV cells in series. Mul-
tiple modules in series-parallel connections form the
PV array. The output power of the entire PV panel is:
(28)
where
is the number of PV cells in a PV module,
is the number of series PV modules, and
is
the number of parallel PV module strands.
2) I-V equation of PV cell in PV panels:
(29)
The derivative of PV cell power to PV cell voltage is zero at
the maximum power point (MPP). So we have
(30)
where
and
are the output current and voltage
of PV cells during
, respectively,
is the current gener-
ated by the incident light during
,
is the reverse satura-
tion or leakage current of the diode during ,
and
are the
equivalent series resistance and parallel resistance of the cell,
respectively, and
is the modiﬁed ideality factor. All the afore-
mentioned parameters depend on solar radiation, cell surface,
temperature, and the optical air mass, and can be calculated as
shown in [12].
IV. SOLUTION METHODOLOGY
A. Linearization of HVAC Formulation
In order to simplify the formulation of the HVAC system (in-
cluding the ice storage unit and the heat storage unit), the coefﬁ-
cient of performance (COP) is used to describe the refrigerating
(or heating) efﬁciency of the HVAC system. The cooling (or
heating) supplied by the HVAC system is the product of the COP
and its electrical energy consumption, and the COP varies with
the electric load rate of the chiller. Note that the electric load
rate is the ratio of the operating power and the nominal power
of a chiller, and it is a no-dimension variable. In this paper, the
COP of the HVAC system is assumed to be a piecewise linear
function of the electric load rate for simpliﬁcation. So the rate
of cooling supplied by the HVAC system is the piecewise par-
abolic function of the electric load rate as shown in Fig. 2. To
simplify, the parabolic function is piecewise linearized in this
paper. The refrigeration mode of the HVAC system is used as
Authorized licensed use limited to: Industrial Technology Research Institute. Downloaded on July 22,2025 at 02:36:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

XU et al.: PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS AND COMPARISON ON ENERGY STORAGE DEVICES FOR SMART BUILDING ENERGY MANAGEMENT
2141
Fig. 2. The rate of cooling supplied as a function of electric load rate.
an example to present the linearization method. The ice-making
mode and heating mode conditions are omitted since they are
similar to that of the refrigeration mode.
As shown in Fig. 2, the electric load rate is divided into I
segments. It is assumed that the rate of cooling supplied by the
HVAC system is a linear function of the electric load rate in each
segment. With the parabolic function, the minimal and maximal
rate of cooling supplied by the HVAC system in each segment
can be obtained. The slope of each segment then can also be
determined using the minimal and maximal values. So (20) can
be linearized as follows.
(31)
(32)
where
,
are the electric load rate and rate of
cooling supplied by the HVAC system in
segment during
, respectively,
and
are the minimal and
maximal electric load rate in
segment, respectively,
and
are the minimal and maximal rate of cooling sup-
plied by the HVAC system, respectively.
is the integer
variable, where
means that there is an electric
load rate in the segment
during
; otherwise,
.
is the slope of
segment.
is the rated value of the
COP in refrigeration mode. Note that the range of the electric
load rate and the refrigeration capacity rate in each segment
are conﬁrmed in the ﬁrst and the second formula in (31), and
the refrigeration capacity rate can be calculated with the third
formula. In (32), the ﬁrst formula shows that if the chiller works
in refrigeration mode, the refrigeration capacity should only be
in one segment during
, according to the ﬁrst formula in (19).
The energy consumption of the HVAC system and the cooling
supplied by the HVAC system also can be calculated with the
second and the third formula in (32), respectively.
In this paper, the CPLEX solver is applied to solve the
proposed problem. It is designed to solve large, difﬁcult prob-
lems efﬁciently with the minimal user intervention. Access is
provided to the branch-and-cut solution algorithms for linear,
quadratically constrained, and mixed integer programming
problems with computation and memory- intensive tasks [13].
The above mixed integer programming problem of (1)–(32) is
solved by this CPLEX solver with demand and solar radiation
proﬁles.
B. Solution to Stochastic Problem by Scenario Tree Method
In practice, there are signiﬁcant uncertainties in demand pro-
ﬁles of building energy systems since electrical demand and
thermal demand (such as lighting, energy consumption of fan
coin units, cooling units, etc.) are uncertain due to uncertain oc-
cupant movement and behavior as well as weather conditions.
Moreover, solar power and thermal generation are also uncer-
tain as they are closely related to the solar radiation and weather
conditions. Therefore, it is necessary to consider the above plan-
ning-and-scheduling problem, keeping in mind the uncertainties
in both the supply and demand side, to obtain the best combi-
nation and optimal capacities of storage devices, as well as the
schedule of all controllable devices in a building energy system
with the best expected cost.
When demand proﬁles and solar radiation are forecasted, it
is likely that the actual demand proﬁles and solar radiation are
signiﬁcantly different from the forecasted values [14]. For the
proposed problem with a clear multi-stage stochastic decision
structure, the scenario tree method is effective in handling the
uncertainties in the demand proﬁles and solar radiation with
multiple scenarios [14], [15]. A scenario is used to describe a
speciﬁc set of demand proﬁles or solar radiation, which is ei-
ther randomly generated with environmental data according to
the signiﬁcant demand proﬁle, or manually built according to
heuristics information of the problem. In order to manage the
aforementioned uncertainties, two sets of scenarios should be
established, which are scenarios of demand proﬁles (including
electrical demand and thermal demand) and of solar radiation.
Note that the scenarios of solar power and thermal generation
can be obtained from solar radiation in (28)–(30) and (27), re-
spectively. Furthermore, in order to obtain a good solution for
the proposed problem, we need to establish different sets of rep-
resentative scenarios. Then the stochastic optimization problem
is solved with the average cost of all scenarios. Considering the
uncertainties in demand proﬁles and solar radiation, this formu-
lation is necessary for solving the stochastic problem by the sce-
nario tree method.
In particular, if the demand proﬁles and solar radiation are
known in advance or they vary only slightly, the stochastic
problem can be approximately simpliﬁed as a deterministic
model with one scenario of the forecasted demand proﬁles and
solar radiation. The best combination and optimal capacities of
storage devices with the forecasted demands and solar radiation
are also obtained by solving the deterministic problem, and
they are compared with the results from solving the stochastic
problem with multiple scenarios. A numerical case of the
procedure to solve the stochastic problem by the scenario tree
method and the comparison to the forecasted demand and solar
radiation will be presented in the next section.
V. NUMERICAL RESULTS
The problem based on an ofﬁce building with three demand
proﬁles is tested at Guangzhou (with hot and humid weather
and solar radiation with little variation), Beijing (with four dis-
tinct seasons), and Harbin (with cold weather and solar radiation
with little variation), China, and the results are presented in this
section. The building energy system includes the power grid,
Authorized licensed use limited to: Industrial Technology Research Institute. Downloaded on July 22,2025 at 02:36:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

2142
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SMART GRID, VOL. 3, NO. 4, DECEMBER 2012
Fig. 3. (a) Electrical demand at Guangzhou. (b) Electrical demand at Beijing. (c) Electrical demand at Harbin. (d) Thermal demand at Guangzhou. (e) Thermal
demand at Beijing. (f) Thermal demand at Harbin. (g) Hot water demand at Guangzhou. (h) Hot water demand at Beijing. (i) Hot water demand at Harbin.
one CCHP unit (with a rated power of 50 kW), PV panels (con-
sisting of two 3-parallel modules with 54 cells in series), a solar
hot water system (containing 10 solar thermal collectors and one
auxiliary electric heater with rated power of 96 kW), one chiller
of a HVAC system (with capacity of 200 kWh), one battery,
one ice storage unit, one water tank, and one heat storage unit.
Testing is performed for over one year. The weather data, in-
cluding the solar radiation and outdoor temperature of the afore-
mentioned locations, is obtained from [16].
It is assumed that the occupants work in the building
from 7:00 to 23:00 everyday. The annual electrical and
thermal demand proﬁles are obtained by solving the ter-
minal control problem according to the occupant comfort
requirements [4] with 2010 weather conditions of the afore-
mentioned locations. With the given comfort level (indoor
temperature:
in summer,
in
winter,
in transitional seasons; indoor hu-
midity:
; concentration of CO2:
;
), the annual electrical and thermal de-
mand proﬁles are obtained, and they are shown in Fig. 3. In
Figs. 3(d)–3(f), positive values of the thermal demand curve
are used for the cooling demand and negative values for the
heating demand. The everyday hot water demand proﬁle is
obtained from [17]. It is assumed to be the same everyday over
the whole year at the three locations as shown in Figs. 3(g)–3(i),
respectively, since hot water demand varies little. The curves
of solar radiation for the selected three sites are also shown in
Figs. 4(a)–4(c), respectively.
In this case, the price of natural gas is
, and
the price of electricity fed into the grid is 0.457 RMB/kWh. The
TOU price of electricity supplied to terminal loads is shown in
Table I[18].
In this paper, the lifetime of the battery, the ice storage unit,
the heat storage unit, and the water tank are deﬁned as 3 years,
10 years, 10 years, and 20 years, respectively. The investment
costs of the storage devices are converted to the scheduling
horizon (one year in this case) with the parameters obtained
from [9], [10] according to their lifetime. The investment cost
per kWh of the battery, the ice storage unit, and the heat storage
Fig. 4. (a) Solar radiation at Guangzhou. (b) Solar radiation at Beijing. (c) Solar
radiation at Harbin.
TABLE I
TOU ELECTRICITY PRICE
unit can be calculated and they are 175.2 RMB/kWh, 21.9
RMB/kWh, and 32.9 RMB/kWh, respectively. The invest-
ment
of the water tank is also determined to be
.
First, the uses of storage devices are analyzed and the results
are shown in Section V-A. Using the obtained annual demand
proﬁles of three locations, the performance analysis of storage
devices is revealed, and the selection rules of storage devices
at different locations are also discussed in Section V-B. Next,
according to the best combination and optimal capacities of
Authorized licensed use limited to: Industrial Technology Research Institute. Downloaded on July 22,2025 at 02:36:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

XU et al.: PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS AND COMPARISON ON ENERGY STORAGE DEVICES FOR SMART BUILDING ENERGY MANAGEMENT
2143
storage devices obtained from Section V-B, the operating strate-
gies of storage devices and their contribution to the power grid
are then shown in Section V-C. Finally, for the problem with
uncertainties, the scenarios of demand proﬁles and solar gener-
ation are generated randomly with the forecasted demand pro-
ﬁles and solar radiation. The solution is obtained by solving the
problem with the expected cost in all scenarios jointly. Further-
more, the comparison between one scenario of the forecasted
demand proﬁles and solar radiation and the multiple scenarios
in the stochastic formulation is represented in Section V-D.
A. Usage of Storage Devices
First, the usage of the water tank is analyzed. We assume
hot water is stored in the tank and heated by an auxiliary elec-
tric heater. The investment cost of one
of water tank con-
sidering depreciation is 3.4 RMB per day. Producing one
of hot water (at
) requires 30 kWh of electrical energy.
One
of hot water is produced during lower-price periods
(0.3515 RMB/kWh) and then consumed during peak-price pe-
riods (0.8135 RMB/kWh), 10.46 RMB of the cost could be
saved. However, if the electric heater is supplied by generated
solar power, 21 RMB is saved. Both the unit investment cost of
the water tank and the price difference between water produc-
tion and consumption periods could be deﬁned as independent
variables. The cost saved is thus a bi-linear function of the two
independent variables. We can easily ﬁnd that there are cost sav-
ings by using the water tank as long as the unit investment cost is
not 30 times more expensive than the differences of peak-valley
electricity prices. In our case, the unit investment cost is about
seven times of the peak-valley price difference. Therefore, the
water tank is very effective in saving building energy cost when
there is hot water demand in peak-price periods.
Similarly, the usage of ice storage unit for the HVAC system
is discussed. We assume that the COP rate of the HVAC system
is 0.8 when the chiller is in refrigeration mode as well as in
ice-making mode. Generating one kWh of cooling energy re-
quires 0.42 kWh of electrical energy in refrigeration mode and
0.71 kWh of electrical energy in ice-making mode. The unit in-
vestment cost of the ice storage unit is 0.06 RMB/kWh per day.
In general, the chiller is in ice-making mode during lower-price
periods, and the ice storage unit supplies the cooling energy in
peak-price periods. So 0.032 RMB/kWh of the cost could be
saved this way. However, the chiller in ice-making mode always
operates on full power, but the power of the chiller in refrigera-
tion mode is determined by the cooling load. Hence, the COP of
the chiller in ice-making mode is generally larger than it in re-
frigeration mode. Therefore, the cost saved is larger than 0.032
RMB/kWh in practice. The cost saved is shown as a bi-linear
function of the price during the ice-making and refrigeration pe-
riods in Fig. 5. It is found that the ice storage unit is economical
when used in a building energy system with TOU prices. Using
the heat storage unit is similar to using the ice storage unit, so
in this paper, it is omitted.
The battery is used in two situations for building energy
savings in general. First, it charges during lower-price periods
and discharges during peak-price periods. Second, it is charged
through the generation of solar power and discharged in the
peak-price periods. The cost-saving function for one unit of
energy is shown in Fig. 6. It is found that the battery was
economical when differences of peak-valley electricity prices
is larger than 0.48 RMB/kWh since the unit investment cost
Fig. 5. Usage condition of the ice storage unit.
Fig. 6. Usage condition of battery.
of the battery is 0.48 RMB/kWh in this paper (assuming the
battery is ideal and the conversion efﬁciency is 1).
Secondly, the generation of solar power is “free” as men-
tioned, and it is economical to use the battery since the invest-
ment cost of the battery is less than the peak price. However,
generated solar power can be used to supply electrical loads (in-
cluding battery charging), as well as be converted into cooling
energy or hot water. Consider that during the highest solar ra-
diation periods (12:00–14:00), the electricity price is 0.4883
RMB/kWh. 0.4883 RMB of the cost can be saved if one kWh of
generated solar power is supplied to the electrical loads. When
the same amount of solar power is stored in the battery, in the ice
storage unit (converted to cooling energy), and in the water tank
(converted to hot water), 0.3335 RMB, 0.68 RMB, and 0.8135
RMB of the cost could be saved, respectively, if the stored en-
ergy is used in peak-price periods. Therefore, usage generated
solar power is prioritized as follows: producing hot water, pro-
ducing ice, supplying to the electric loads, and charging the bat-
tery, all dependent on their capacities. In other word, it is eco-
nomical to use the battery when there is more solar energy than
needed for the ﬁrst three requirements.
B. Allocation of Storage Devices and Energy Efﬁciency
The focus of this subsection is to discuss the performance
analysis and selection criteria of the storage devices. The formu-
lation is approximated as a deterministic model of one scenario
of the forecasted demand proﬁles and solar radiation without
considering the uncertainties in demand proﬁles and solar radi-
ation. With the 2010 weather data, the forecasted demand pro-
ﬁles and solar radiation are determined. By using the aforemen-
tioned electrical, thermal, and hot water demands of the three
locations, the CPLEX solver is applied to solve the problem of
(1)–(32) with the error gap set as 0.01 for different weather con-
ditions. The best combination and optimal capacities can be then
obtained for the three locations, respectively, and the results are
shown in Table II. This computational time is about 780 seconds
on average on a Windows PC with 3.2 GHz and 2 GB memory.
In Guangzhou, there is no extra generated solar power to
store in daytime because of the high cooling demand year long.
Therefore, there is no need for an electrical battery. The heat
storage unit is also not needed since there is no heating demand.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Industrial Technology Research Institute. Downloaded on July 22,2025 at 02:36:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

2144
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SMART GRID, VOL. 3, NO. 4, DECEMBER 2012
TABLE II
OPTIMAL COMBINATION OF STORAGE DEVICES AT DIFFERENT LOCATIONS
TABLE III
OVERALL COST WITH DIFFERENT COMBINATIONS OF STORAGE DEVICES
Therefore, the best combination of storage devices is the water
tank and the ice storage unit. However, in Beijing, there are
four distinct seasons, and both the ice and heat storage units are
needed in the building energy system since both cooling and
heating demand exist. In addition, the solar radiation and de-
mand proﬁles ﬂuctuate signiﬁcantly during transitional seasons.
It is possible to use the extra solar power to charge the battery.
Therefore, the combination of the battery, the water tank, the
ice storage unit, and the heat storage unit can be used. In Harbin,
since the heating demand is present most of the year while a little
cooling energy is needed in the summer, the ice and heat storage
unit are both needed, but the capacity of the ice storage unit is
relatively small. Furthermore, solar radiation is so low that not
enough solar power is available to charge the battery. There-
fore, the combination of the water tank, the heat storage unit,
and the ice storage unit is the best choice. In order to summa-
rize the selection criteria of the storage devices in detail, we test
the performances in the different combinations over one year,
and the results are shown in Table III. Note that the ice storage
unit and the heat storage unit are considered to be an ensemble
thermal storage unit to analyze their entire efﬁciency.
In this paper energy efﬁciency is used to analyze the perfor-
mance of the storage devices. The energy efﬁciency of a speciﬁc
combination of storage devices is deﬁned as the ratio of overall
cost savings with the above storage devices to that without these
devices.
First, a single storage device is tested. The battery energy ef-
ﬁciency of Guangzhou, Beijing, and Harbin is only 5.9%, 5.4%,
and 6.2%, respectively. It is found that the battery is insensitive
to differences in weather conditions, but is relatively inefﬁcient
in reducing building energy cost. The energy efﬁciency of the
thermal storage unit is 15.7%, 9.7%, and 19.9% at Guangzhou,
Beijing, and Harbin, respectively. When there is heavy cooling
demand in the summer, the chiller should be set to refrigeration
mode, so the ice storage unit only can lead to energy savings
with the TOU prices. However, in the winter, the heating de-
mand for the HVAC system may be lower in the daytime so that
the heat supplied by the solar energy may be partially stored
in the heat storage unit. This is why the energy efﬁciency of
thermal storage in Guangzhou is less than that in Harbin. It is
also found that thermal demand has a major impact on selecting
the thermal storage unit, and its energy efﬁciency is proportional
to the thermal demand, including cooling and heating energy.
The water tank has good performance in energy efﬁciency of
28.1%, 18.9%, and 13.3% in Guangzhou, Beijing, and Harbin,
respectively. The energy efﬁciency of the water tank in Harbin
is low since the solar radiation and the temperature of munic-
ipal water are both low. It is also found that the performance
difference between the locations is very large. The major fac-
tors affecting the energy efﬁciency of the water tank are solar
radiation and weather conditions. The standard deviation of the
energy efﬁciency between different locations is 38%, thus it is
relatively sensitive under the different weather conditions. The
efﬁciency gradually decreases with solar radiation and outdoor
temperature. Therefore, the water tank is suitable for regions
with high solar radiation and outdoor temperature.
Secondly, the performance of a combination of two types of
storage devices is tested. The energy efﬁciency of the combina-
tion of the water tank and the thermal storage unit is largest for
all three possible combinations of two storage devices at the dif-
ferent locations. The results in Guangzhou and Harbin are the
same between the combination of the water tank and the thermal
storage unit and the solution obtained by the proposed method.
It again indicates that using the battery is not economical at these
locations due to their corresponding demand proﬁles and solar
radiation.
In conclusion, some rules for selecting the type of storage de-
vices with speciﬁc demand proﬁles and solar radiation are sum-
marized as follows. The water tank, the ice storage unit, and the
heat storage unit should be selected in a building energy system
since they have good performance in building energy savings
at all locations. The capacity of the water tank should be se-
lected while considering solar radiation and weather data. The
water tank is suited for regions with high solar radiation and
outdoor temperature, such as low latitude regions. The capacity
of the thermal storage unit should be selected while considering
thermal demand. And the thermal storage unit is recommended
for regions with high thermal demand, such as low latitude re-
gions and high latitude regions. The energy efﬁciency of the
battery is less than that of other storage devices since its invest-
ment cost is high and the lifetime is short. But the battery could
be used to store the excess solar power in regions with highly
ﬂuctuant solar radiation such as those with distinct seasons. In
addition, if the battery is used in the building energy system,
it can help in balancing the ﬂuctuation of generated renewable
power and also can be used in emergencies.
It is known that the capacities of storage devices have an
impact on energy efﬁciency. A tradeoff between the capacity
and investment cost of the storage device should be made.
The proposed method has good performance in managing
this tradeoff with the demand proﬁles and solar radiation.
The proposed method is very effective for choosing the best
combination and optimal capacities of storage devices with
speciﬁc demand proﬁles and solar radiation under different
weather conditions.
C. Operating Strategies of Storage Devices and Their
Contribution to the Power Grid
The optimal operating strategy of each storage device is pre-
sented in this subsection. Using the combination and capacities
from Section V-B, everyday operating strategies of the storage
devices are obtained by solving the problem with the proposed
Authorized licensed use limited to: Industrial Technology Research Institute. Downloaded on July 22,2025 at 02:36:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

XU et al.: PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS AND COMPARISON ON ENERGY STORAGE DEVICES FOR SMART BUILDING ENERGY MANAGEMENT
2145
Fig. 7. (a) Operating strategy of the ice storage unit. (b) COP of the HVAC
system.
method. Since the operating strategies are similar despite dif-
ferent locations, only one summer day in Beijing is used as an
example to demonstrate the characteristics of operating strate-
gies.
The operating strategy of the HVAC system is shown in
Fig. 7(a). The chiller of the HVAC system works in ice-making
mode during lower-price and lower-load periods (such as
0:00–7:00). During these periods, most of the cooling quantity
generated by the chiller is stored in the ice storage unit whereas
the rest is supplied to the loads. Then the cooling quantity
stored in the ice storage unit is supplied to the loads during
peak-price periods (such as 7:00–10:00 and 19:00–22:00) to
reduce the overall cost. The chiller is in refrigeration mode in
the daytime since the cooling load is large. The chiller is set to
ice-making mode from 18:00 to 19:00 since the cooling load is
relatively small so that the COP is low if the chiller switches
to refrigeration mode. So comparing the COP function and
energy consumption for both modes, it is found that the chiller
in ice-making mode is relatively economical in this period. The
COP of the HVAC system during the whole scheduling horizon
in this case is in the high efﬁciency interval (0.77–1) as shown
in Fig. 7(b). It illustrates that the ice storage unit can be used
not only to save building energy cost, but also to improve the
efﬁciency of the HVAC system. For the heat storage unit, the
same conclusion is obtained, so it is omitted here.
The operating strategy of the solar hot water system is shown
in Fig. 8. In Fig. 8(a), the auxiliary electric heater operates at full
capacity to store the hot water in the tank [as shown in Fig. 8(b)]
during lower-price periods (such as 0:00–7:00). During peak-
price periods (such as 7:00–11:00 and 19:00–23:00), the auxil-
iary electric heater is shut down or only used to remain warm.
However, from 8:00–10:00, the electric heater should be started
up since solar radiation is too low to produce enough hot water.
From 13:00–19:00, the electric heater is at full capacity to store
hot water, and this water is used in the nightly peak-price pe-
riods.
Fig. 8. (a) Operating strategy of the auxiliary electric heater. (b) Dynamic
process of the water tank.
Fig. 9. Operating strategy of the battery.
The operating strategy of the battery is shown in Fig. 9. The
battery is discharging from 7:00 to 8:00 since it is a peak-price
period and there is initial power energy in the battery. When
there is excess solar power such as from 15:00 to 19:00, the
battery is fully charged by solar power. And it is discharged
during peak-price periods (such as 19:00–22:00). The battery
is generally charged by generated solar power and discharged
in nightly peak-price periods.
By using these operating strategies, the storage devices can
be used not only to reduce the overall building energy cost, but
also to adjust the power grid. The impact of storage devices
on shifting peak and valley is discussed as follows. The differ-
ence between the power load of the distribution grid with and
without the above storage devices over the day is used to demon-
strate their contribution to the power grid, as shown in Fig. 10.
About 35% of the power load in peak-load periods is shifted
to valley-load periods with the storage devices. And the differ-
ence between the power in peak-load periods and in lower-load
periods is also reduced. Thus, the storage devices have good
performance in adjusting the power grid. Furthermore, the in-
vestment cost and installed capacity of the power plant and its
emission of CO2 can be also reduced.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Industrial Technology Research Institute. Downloaded on July 22,2025 at 02:36:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

2146
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SMART GRID, VOL. 3, NO. 4, DECEMBER 2012
Fig. 10. Impact of storage devices on the power grid.
TABLE IV
THE OPTIMAL SOLUTIONS WITH UNCERTAINTIES AT DIFFERENT LOCATIONS
D. Stochastic Problem Solved by the Scenario Tree Method
Through the above analysis, it is found that demand proﬁles
and solar radiation have a huge impact in the selection of the
types and capacities of the storage devices. To ﬁnd a good so-
lution, the uncertainties in demand proﬁles and solar radiation
should be considered. In this paper, the scenario tree method is
used to solve the stochastic optimization problem. A set of sce-
narios of demand proﬁles and solar radiation is used to describe
their uncertainties. The solution should have good average per-
formance over all scenarios. In this problem, the major uncer-
tainties are electrical and thermal demand proﬁles and solar ra-
diation. To describe their uncertainties, a set of 5 scenarios of
the demand proﬁles and a set of 5 scenarios of the solar radi-
ation are randomly generated with the forecasted demand and
solar radiation, respectively. The demand proﬁles and solar ra-
diation are both assumed to follow independent normal distri-
bution, and the scenarios of the demand proﬁles are within 5%
standard deviation and solar radiation within 20% standard de-
viation of their forecasted values, respectively. The probability
of each scenario is assumed to be same in this paper. In other
words,
and
are equal to 1/5 in this case. Note that the
aforementioned annual demand proﬁles and solar radiation at
three locations are assumed to be the forecasted ones.
The above problem is solved with the minimum average cost
of all scenarios. The error gap is set to be 0.01. The optimal
average cost and the best combination of storage devices at dif-
ferent locations are shown in Table IV. The computational time
is about 27 000 seconds on a Windows PC with 3.2 GHz and 2
GB memory.
As seen in Table IV, some differences in the best combination
and optimal capacities between the solutions obtained in Section
V-B by the simpliﬁed deterministic problem (with one scenario
of the forecasted demand proﬁles and solar radiation) and the
solutions for the stochastic problem (with multiple scenarios)
were found. For example, the optimal capacities of the battery
in Harbin determined by the two methods are different. So we
are interested in comparing the performance of the simpliﬁed
deterministic problem with the forecasted scenario with that of
the stochastic problem with multiple scenarios. The best combi-
TABLE V
THE PERFORMANCE COMPARISON OF USING ONE FORECASTED SCENARIO
AND MULTIPLE SCENARIOS AT BEIJING
nation and the optimal capacities of these two methods at Bei-
jing are tested in several other scenarios, as shown in Table V. It
is seen that the performance of the stochastic problem with the
multiple scenarios is better in the major scenarios, especially in
the scenarios with larger standard deviation. But, in general, the
performance of the simpliﬁed deterministic problem with one
scenario of the forecasted values is still very good and it is only
less than 7% while the computational time is one over thirty-ﬁve
in comparison to the multiple scenarios in the stochastic formu-
lation.
VI. CONCLUSIONS
In this paper, we study the performance analysis and compar-
ison of different energy storage devices in building energy sys-
tems in a microgrid environment. The building energy system
operation is formulated as an energy cost minimization problem
with storage devices and other devices in the system. The un-
certainties in demand proﬁles and solar radiation are consid-
ered, and a stochastic optimization problem is formulated. The
scenario tree method is applied to solve the problem. Numer-
ical results demonstrate that the proposed method is effective
in selecting the best combination and optimal capacities of the
storage devices, and in obtaining the optimal operating strategy
of each device in the building energy system. It is found that
thermal storage units and water tanks are effective in saving
energy cost in all scenarios, but the electrical battery may not
be economical for use due to its high investment cost and short
lifetime. Based on the above analysis, rules for selecting storage
devices at a speciﬁc location can be determined. By comparing
the simpliﬁed model of one scenario of the demand and solar
radiation proﬁles to the multiple scenarios in the stochastic for-
mulation, we found that it would be sufﬁcient in many cases to
obtain the best combination of storage devices with the fore-
casted demand and solar radiation efﬁciently without using sto-
chastic formation.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank the editors and reviewers
for their constructive comments, Dr. Stella M. Oggianu and Dr.
Craig Walker at United Technologies Research Center for their
valuable advice, and Mr. Biao Sun, Mr. Jianxiang Shen, and Ms.
Xiaoyan Xu for their valuable suggestions.
REFERENCES
[1] Y. J. Huang, The Impact of Climate Change on the Energy Use of
the US Residential and Commercial Building Sector.
Berkeley, CA:
Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, 2006.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Industrial Technology Research Institute. Downloaded on July 22,2025 at 02:36:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

XU et al.: PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS AND COMPARISON ON ENERGY STORAGE DEVICES FOR SMART BUILDING ENERGY MANAGEMENT
2147
[2] X. Li, H. Li, and W. Shi, “Ice storage system design based on cooling
load of design period,” (in Chinese) HV&AC, vol. 37, no. 5, pp. 83–88,
2007.
[3] J. E. Braun, “A comparison of chiller-priority storage-priority, and
optimal control of an ice-storage system,” in ASHRAE, Atlanta, GA,
1992.
[4] B. Sun, P. B. Luh, Q. S. Jia, Z. Jiang, F. Wang, and C. Song, “An in-
tegrated control of shading blinds, natural ventilation, and HVAC sys-
tems for energy saving and human comfort,” in Proc. 6th Annu. IEEE
Conf. Autom. Sci. Eng., Toronto, ON, Canada, Aug. 21–24, 2010.
[5] A. Tzempelikos and A. K. Athienitis, “Investigation of lighting, day-
lighting and shading design options for new Concordia University engi-
neering building,” in Proc. eSim2002 Building Simul. Conf., Montreal,
QC, Canada, 2002, pp. 177–184.
[6] D. Mooney and B. Kroposki, “Electricity, resources, and building sys-
tems integration at the National Renewable Energy Laboratory,” in
Proc. IEEE Power Energy Soc. Gen. Meet., Calgary, AB, Canada, Jul.
2009, pp. 1–3.
[7] X. Guan, Z. Xu, and Q. S. Jia, “Energy efﬁcient buildings facilitated by
microgrid,” IEEE Trans. Smart Grid, vol. 1, no. 3, pp. 243–252, 2010.
[8] C. Marnay, G. Venkataramanan, M. Stadler, A. S. Siddiqui, R. Fire-
stone, and B. Chandran, “Optimal technology selection and operation
of commercial-building microgrids,” IEEE Trans. Power Syst., vol. 23,
no. 3, pp. 975–982, 2008.
[9] A. S. Siddiqui, R. M. Firestone, S. Ghosh, M. Stadler, J. L. Edwards,
and C. Marnay, Distributed Energy Resources Customer Adoption
Modeling With Combined Heat and Power Applications.
Berkeley,
CA: Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, 2003.
[10] A. S. Siddiqui, C. Marnay, R. M. Firestone, and N. Zhou, Dis-
tributed Generation With Heat Recovery and Storage.
Berkeley,
CA: Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, 2005.
[11] Z. Lai, “Simulation of Quasi-Steady State Model for BCHP system,”
(in Chinese) Master’s thesis, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China,
2009.
[12] M. G. Villalva, J. R. Gazoli, and E. R. Filho, “Modeling and circuit-
based simulation of photovoltaic arrays,” in Proc. Power Electron.
Conf., (COBEP), 2009, pp. 1244–1254.
[13] ILOG CPLEX 12.1 User’s Manual [Online]. Available: ftp://ftp.soft-
ware.ibm.com/software/websphere/ilog/docs/optimization/cplex/
ps_usrmancplex.pdf
[14] J. Wang and M. Shahidehpiour, “Security constrained unit commitment
with volatile wind power generation,” IEEE Trans. Power Syst., vol.
23, no. 3, pp. 1319–1327, Aug. 2008.
[15] K. Høyland and S. W. Wallace, “Generating scenario trees for multi-
stage decision problems,” Manage. Sci., vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 295–307,
2001.
[16] DeST software Department of Building Science, Tsinghua University,
2008 [Online]. Available: http://www.dest com.cn.
[17] Development Unit of DeST in Tsinghua University, Building Energy Ef-
ﬁciency Technology and Application in Chin.
Beijing, China: China
Architecture & Building Press, 2007, ch. Ch. 4.
[18] Website of China National Development and Reform Commission
[Online]. Available: http://www.sdpc.gov.cn/
Zhanbo Xu received his B.E. degree in electrical
engineering and automation from Harbin Institute
of Technology University, China, in 2008. He is
currently working toward his Ph.D. degree at the
Systems Engineering Institute, Xi’an Jiaotong Uni-
versity, China. His research interests include smart
power grids, buildings energy management and
automation, and optimization of large-scale systems.
Xiaohong Guan (M’93–SM’95–F’07) received his
B.S. and M.S. degrees in control engineering from
Tsinghua University, Beijing, China, in 1982 and
1985, respectively, and his Ph.D. degree in electrical
engineering from the University of Connecticut,
Storrs, in 1993.
He was a Senior Consulting Engineer with PG&E
from 1993 to 1995. He visited the Division of En-
gineering and Applied Science, Harvard University
from January 1999 to February 2000. Since 1995
he has been with the Systems Engineering Institute,
Xian Jiaotong University, Xian, China and appointed as the Cheung Kong
Professor of Systems Engineering since 1999, and the Dean of School of
Electronic and Information Engineering since 2008. Since 2001 he has been the
Director of the Center for Intelligent and Networked Systems, Tsinghua Uni-
versity, Beijing, China, and served as the Head of Department of Automation
from 2003 to 2008. His research interests include complex networked systems
including smart power grids, planning and scheduling of electrical power and
manufacturing systems, and electric power markets.
Qing-Shan Jia (S’02–M’06) received the B.E. de-
gree in automation in 2002 and the Ph.D. degree in
control science and engineering in 2006, both from
Tsinghua University, Beijing, China.
He is currently an Associate Professor at the
Center for Intelligent and Networked Systems
(CFINS), Department of Automation, TNLIST,
Tsinghua University, Beijing. He was a Visiting
Scholar at Harvard University in 2006, and a Visiting
Scholar at the Hong Kong University of Science
and Technology in 2010. His research interests
include theories and applications of discrete event dynamic systems (DEDSs)
and simulation-based performance evaluation and optimization of complex
systems.
Jiang Wu (S’07-M’09) received his B.S. degree in
Electrical Engineering from Xi’an Jiaotong Univer-
sity, Shaanxi, China in 2002, and his Ph.D. in systems
engineering from the same university in 2008.
He is currently a Lecturer at Systems Engineering
Institute, Xian Jiaotong University. His research
interests include optimization and simulation for
renewable generation, smart grids, and electricity
markets.
Dai Wang received his B.E. degree in electrical engi-
neering and automation from Xi’an Jiaotong Univer-
sity, China, in 2010. He is currently working toward
his Ph.D. degree at the Systems Engineering Insti-
tute, Xi’an Jiaotong University, China. His research
interests include smart grids, demand response, and
optimization of large-scale systems.
Siyun Chen received the B.E. degree in Automation
from North China Electric Power University, China,
in 2009. He is working toward his Ph.D. degree at the
Systems Engineering Institute, Xi’an Jiaotong Uni-
versity, China. His research interests include smart
grids, energy management and automation, and opti-
mization of large-scale systems.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Industrial Technology Research Institute. Downloaded on July 22,2025 at 02:36:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.