Proceedings of the 2016 Winter Simulation Conference 
T. M. K. Roeder, P. I. Frazier, R. Szechtman, E. Zhou, T. Huschka, and S. E. Chick, eds. 
 
 
 
SMART BUILDING ENERGY MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS (BEMS) SIMULATION 
CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK 
 
Jintaek Ock 
Raja R. A. Issa 
Ian Flood 
 
Rinker School of Construction Management  
 
University of Florida 
Box 115703 
Gainesville, FL 32611-5703, USA 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
Continuing growth of energy use by commercial buildings has created a need to develop innovative 
techniques to reduce and optimize building energy use.  Recently Building Energy Management Systems 
(BEMS) have gained popularity because of increasing interest in building energy conservation and savings.  
In this study, a conceptual framework for real-time weather responsive control systems combined with 
BEMS is proposed to achieve model simulation based Smart BEMS.  The proposed control system is 
developed using building energy control patterns, which are generated from the combinations of weather 
data changes.  As a result, building energy use can be adjusted by, for example, using daylighting responsive 
controls for electrical lighting as well as by adjusting the HVAC operational schedule, in response to 
weather changes.  To create control logics for model based Smart systems, BIM and Computational Fluid 
Dynamic (CFD) simulation are used to obtain material properties and to develop air flow operational 
algorithms, respectively.   
1 
INTRODUCTION 
It is widely recognized that existing buildings often consume more energy than is necessary from the design 
intent (Mills 2011).  An increase in awareness about critical energy use in the building sector stimulated 
public and academic attention to the need for improvement of building energy efficiency, and there are 
various efforts to develop energy efficient buildings.  The primary objective of energy efficient buildings 
is energy conservation and reduction in building operation process by controlling energy consumption.  
 
Particularly, in the commercial building sector in the U.S., energy for space conditions (heating and 
cooling) and lighting comprises more than half of total commercial building energy consumption (U.S. 
Department of Energy 2012).  Therefore, saving electricity for HVAC (Heating, ventilation, and air 
conditioning) and lighting during the building operation phase, while maintaining occupants’ comfort, can 
be one of the main strategies for the achievement of energy efficient buildings (Oldewurtel et al. 2012).   
 
As the needs for energy savings and efficient energy use in the building operation stage is escalating, 
continuous control of building energy consumption, which is implemented by Building Energy 
Management System (BEMS), is important (Kolokotsa et al. 2009).  The majority of BEMS are primarily 
applied to manage HVAC and lighting systems so as to achieve optimum indoor environmental quality by 
minimizing energy costs.  Also, BEMS can be used to monitor energy use, to keep historical energy usage 
data, and to report buildings’ performance and operation. More specifically, currently developed BEMS are 
primarily collecting building energy usage patterns, tracking real-time energy use intensity (EUI), and 
identifying abnormal energy consumption, without integrated building energy control systems.  Moreover,  
978-1-5090-4486-3/16/$31.00 ©2016 IEEE
3237
Authorized licensed use limited to: Industrial Technology Research Institute. Downloaded on July 22,2025 at 02:36:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

Ock, Issa, and Flood 
 
most currently used BEMS are sensor and metering based monitoring system, which do not consider 
detailed building geometric information.  Thus, predicting and analyzing building energy use for efficient 
building operation strategy are not available using current BEMS.   
 
With consideration of BEMS functional scalability, many recent research studies about building energy 
performance have actively approached the following representative concepts: 
 
1. Integration with building control system (Wong et al. 2010, Prívara et al. 2011, Široký et al. 2011, 
Oldewurtel et al. 2012, O'Neill et al. 2014, Heo et al. 2015).  
2. Building Information Modeling (BIM) based building energy performance (O'Donnell et al. 2013, 
Dong et al. 2014, Moon and Choi 2014). 
 
 
Integrating the BEMS with automatic or manual building control systems can adjust abnormal levels 
of energy use (e.g. upper level of set point).  For example, if excessive energy use for the air conditioning 
of a specific room is detected, the integrated automatic or manual control system in the BEMS can adjust 
the air conditioning system in the affected room.   
 
With the rapid advance of Information and Communication Technology (ICT) automatic building 
control system have become more popular.  A data communication protocol for the buildings’ automatic 
control network, the BACnet standard, is used to develop BEMS based automatic control system 
(O'Donnell et al. 2013).    
 
BIM is also an integral part to develop advanced BEMS since BIM stores the buildings’ geometric 
information, physical properties and component’s information.  Buildings’ material and equipment (e.g. 
HVAC) properties can be used for estimating physical based energy performances.  Therefore, BIM based 
BEMS is, potentially more reliable and accurate than metering based BEMS.   
 
In addition to the described two BEMS concept, the latest research about building energy performance 
is focused on real-time energy management, not rule-based or historical data based.  Real-time weather data 
and energy usage pattern will be collected and analyzed, then, an appropriate control system will be applied 
to dynamically optimize energy flow (Kang et al. 2014).  Although this type of advanced BEMS operation 
increases its accuracy and reliability for calculating energy performances, the energy use set point is usually 
underestimated due to occupants’ effects.  The behavior of a building’s occupants have a significant impact 
on the energy use patterns by disturbing room temperature and heating and cooling loads (Ryan and 
Sanquist 2012).   
 
Taking into account the latest research directions about BEMS and advanced building energy 
performance, this study proposes a conceptual framework for model simulation based BEMS.  More 
specifically, the proposed conceptual BEMS in this study is a real-time building energy simulation based 
BEMS including occupants’ uncertainty.  In this study, occupants’ uncertain behavior is limited to the status 
of window’s being open or closed.  
 
2 
DEVELOPMENT OF CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK  
2.1 
Language 
The proposed conceptual framework for smart BEMS in this study, which includes real-time simulation 
based weather responsive control and occupants’ impact, covers two dominant energy use control in 
buildings, daylighting and HVAC as shown in Figure 1.  
 
Enclosed in the blue box is the daylight control workflow and in the red box is the heating and cooling 
control workflow.  Information from BIM is used as geometric parameters for calculating lighting intensity 
and thermal performance of the room.  And, 1-hour interval, real-time weather data including outdoor 
temperature and wind characteristics is collected from an on-site weather station or from weather web site.  
Also, a set point reference energy model is created using EnergyPlus representing design intent or calibrated 
acceptable energy performance to compare and evaluate current energy use pattern of the building. 
 
3238
Authorized licensed use limited to: Industrial Technology Research Institute. Downloaded on July 22,2025 at 02:36:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

Ock, Issa, and Flood 
 
 
Figure 1: Smart BEMS Conceptual Framework. 
2.2 
Lighting Controlled BEMS 
In order to implement lighting control, pre-defined daylight intensity by time variable is generated using a 
daylighting simulation tool such as Autodesk 3D Max Design, Daysim or Radiance.  These tools are 
validated with experimental analysis (Reinhart and Breton 2009).  Required data for the daylight intensity 
database can be collected from the BIM data such as the building’s location, orientation and glazing 
properties.  Generated hourly changing daylight intensity data is sent to database, called daylight intensity 
data repository.  The proposed BEMS sends a query every hour to acquire the daylighting intensity pattern 
of the building.  The selected hour daylighting intensity from repository is transferred, and then compared 
to current lighting energy usage pattern.  If the space daylighting exceeds the artificial lighting brightness, 
the lighting control turns off the light in the selected space.  
 
A lighting control simulation test was performed in this study using a simple office space unit BIM 
model.  The area of the test unit model is 2000 ft2 (40 ft by 50 ft), and it has a north faced curtain wall 
system.  The hourly averaged transmitted daylighting intensity into the office room was simulated with 
following assumptions: 
 
1. Sky condition is clear. 
2. Model location is Gainesville, FL (Latitude: 29.6742° and Longitude: -82.3363°) 
3. Reference office brightness is set as 2000 lux 
4. Artificial lighting is installed horizontally with 10 ft. interval (i.e. 3 row) as shown in Figure 2. 
5. Each row of artificial lighting is separately controlled.    
 
 
An hourly daylighting simulation was conducted and the analysis results were generated as visual 
images and a spreadsheet as shown in Figure 3.  The simulation was performed based on a normal office 
building schedule, 8 am to 5 pm, at 1 hour intervals on December 3rd, 2015.  The daylighting intensity 
display image of each hour is generated by averaging 1-hour duration transmitted daylighting intensity.  In 
addition, spreadsheet type result includes transient daylighting intensity at the simulation starting and 
ending time.  Figure 3 illustrates the daylighting level of the proposed office space at 9 am, 1 pm, 3 pm, 
and 5 pm to identify excess lighting levels. 
3239
Authorized licensed use limited to: Industrial Technology Research Institute. Downloaded on July 22,2025 at 02:36:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

Ock, Issa, and Flood 
 
 
Figure 2: Top view of test office unit BIM model implemented 3 rowed ceiling lights. 
 
 
As shown in Figure 3, from 1 pm to 3 pm, the illuminance level of the area around the glazing wall and 
“Row 1” exceeded 2000 lux and the daylighting illuminance level is decreased from 4 pm.  Therefore, the 
“Row 1” lighting area would have enough illuminance level (> 2000 lux) without turning on “Row 1” 
ceiling lightings during 2 hours (1 to 3 pm).  This simulation results will be applied to the proposed BEMS 
to control “Row 1” ceiling lights to turn off from 1 pm to 3 pm.  Then ceiling lights will turn on again from 
4 pm.  
 
This simple test daylighting simulation is conducted using a simple office room unit model.  In real 
practice, whole buildings’ lighting simulation is required to apply the BEMS control.  However, running a 
whole building lighting analysis will require substantial calculation time.  Thus, implementing real-time 
lighting simulation to the proposed BEMS may not be practical.  Consequently, this study proposes a 
daylighting intensity data repository concept.  The daylighting illuminance levels for certain (e.g. maximum 
of 1 year) period are simulated using a BIM model, and the results will be organized by day and time, then 
it will be saved to the database.  The proposed BEMS will use pre-developed daylighting data whenever 
starting operation.    
 
The conducted lighting simulation assumed a clear sky condition.  But, in real practice, the sky 
condition changes, and it is a significant factor affecting daylight intensity.  Therefore, for more accurate 
lighting control, the effect of sky conditions on daylight intensity needs to be further evaluated.  Developing 
a coefficient value for varied sky condition would be one of the simplest methods to apply into the proposed 
BEMS. 
 
 
 
3240
Authorized licensed use limited to: Industrial Technology Research Institute. Downloaded on July 22,2025 at 02:36:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

Ock, Issa, and Flood 
 
    
 
    
 
Figure 3: The simulation results of daylighting illuminance level at 9am, 1pm, 3pm, and 5pm for test 
office BIM model. 
2.3 
Heating and Cooling Controlled BEMS 
Analyzing heating and cooling energy use requires a more complex analysis of the combined parametric 
effects on the buildings’ thermal performances.  The combined effects of real-time weather data, solar 
radiation intensity, and glazing properties on the thermal performance of a room needs to be carefully 
evaluated.  Theoretically, thermal performance of the rooms in a building is determined by interactions of 
conduction, convection, and radiation.  Investigating thermal interaction is not a trivial task.  In order for 
fast and reliable thermal analysis, Computational Fluid Dynamic (CFD) techniques are used in this study.  
CFD simulation is a comprehensive tool to analyze thermal performance with consideration of thermal 
conduction, convection, and radiation.  The results of CFD simulation have been validated in many research 
(Guardo et al. 2011, Kim et al. 2011, Mingotti et al. 2011, Radosavljevic et al. 2014, Ray et al. 2014).  
 
For reliable CFD simulation in this study, building geometric information as parameters, which are 
independent of time, and outdoor weather condition including temperature with wind characteristics as time 
dependent variables are required.  Building geometric parameters are extracted from the BIM data, and 
hourly changing outdoor weather condition is collected from an on-site weather station or weather website.    
 
Since the proposed BEMS are designed to identify abnormal energy use within a certain time interval, 
the specified time interval for collecting real-time weather data and the duration of CFD simulation have to 
be set up.  In this study, real-time weather data will be collected every hour starting from 10 minute before 
the building schedule.  And, updated weather data for every hour is added to the CFD thermal performance 
simulation for the next hour.  The conceptual BEMS schedule proposed in this study is shown in Figure 4.  
In addition to geometric and weather information, solar radiation intensity is one of the significant factors 
used to determine thermal performance of buildings’ room.  Analysis of the solar radiation effect of a 
room’s thermal performance requires substantial calculation time.  Therefore, in order to simplify the CFD 
based thermal simulation process, solar radiation intensity for developing heating and cooling control 
BEMS is preliminarily calculated using physical fundamentals of solar radiation as shown in Table 1.  The  
3241
Authorized licensed use limited to: Industrial Technology Research Institute. Downloaded on July 22,2025 at 02:36:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

Ock, Issa, and Flood 
 
 
Figure 4: Proposed BEMS operation schedule. 
Table 1: Hourly solar radiation intensity based on physical fundamentals.   
Beam radiation (ܫ௕௖) + Sky diffuse radiation (ܫௗ௖) + Ground reflected radiation (ܫ௥௖) 
ࡿࢀൌࡵ࢈ࢉ൅ࡵࢊࢉ൅ࡵ࢘ࢉ 
ࡵ࢈ࢉൌ ࡯࢔ࡵࢋି࢑/ ࢙࢏࢔ࢻ∗ࢉ࢕࢙࢏ 
ܥ௡ = clearness number (assuming the value 
of 1) 
ܫ = extraterrestrial solar radiation 
݇ = atmospheric optical depth 
ߙ = solar altitude angle 
݅ = angle of incidence 
ࡵࢊࢉൌ࡯ሺ࡯࢔ࡵࢋି࢑/ ୱ୧୬ఈሻࢉ࢕࢙૛ሺࢼ/૛ሻ 
ܥ = sky diffuse factor 
ߚ = wall angle 
ࡵ࢘ࢉൌ ࣋࡯࢔ࡵࢋି࢑/ ୱ୧୬ఈሺ࢙࢏࢔ࢻ൅࡯ሻ 
࢙࢏࢔૛ሺࢼ/૛ሻ 
ߩ = ground reflection factor (0.2) 
 
proposed BEMS is used to identify hourly thermal change of rooms in buildings, the data of hourly changing 
solar radiation intensity is also collected.  More specifically, geometric BIM data including optical 
properties is applied for developing solar radiation intensity.  The developed BIM accommodated solar 
radiation intensity presents the amount of heat energy.  Consequently, variable solar intensity depending 
on outdoor and indoor temperature will be analyzed during the CFD simulation process.  The workflow for 
this process is shown in Figure 5. 
 
 
If window is opened by occupants who desire ventilation during the building operation schedule, 
analyzing thermal performance of the room would be more complicated due to consideration of the 
additional combined effect of air inflow to the room with a heating or cooling schedule.  In general, air  
3242
Authorized licensed use limited to: Industrial Technology Research Institute. Downloaded on July 22,2025 at 02:36:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

Ock, Issa, and Flood 
 
 
Figure 5: Schematic workflow for CFD process of proposed BEMS. 
 
inflow from outside to the room circulate air flow movement resulting in room temperature change.  
Fluctuating room temperature results in an abnormal schedule for heating and cooling.  In order to reduce 
room temperature fluctuation by the occupants’ uncertain behavior, extended CFD simulation is used to 
control heating and cooling energy consumption for the case of opened windows.  Extended CFD 
simulation in this study is a separate process because of the occurrence of different boundary condition for 
thermal analysis caused by the opened windows.  By implementing a separated extended CFD simulation 
process for uncertain cases, the main CFD simulation process for the proposed BEMS will not disturbed.  
 
In this study, the case of opened windows is detected by installed sensors, the room zonal information 
from BIM and real-time weather data are imported to extended CFD simulation to create new boundary 
conditions and run thermal analysis.  Computed thermal performance result of an opened window room 
would be compared with targeted set point temperature.  If the new result from extended CFD for an opened 
window room has a certain level of discrepancy with set point, heating and cooling equipment will be turned 
on to adjust room temperature.   
3 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE RESEARCH 
The research area of building energy performance management and control is rapidly expanding and 
advancing due to recent substantial energy conservation efforts in the building sector.  Although several 
types of BEMS have been implemented in office buildings, the major functions of these types of BEMS are 
to monitor, collect, store, and report energy usage data without control systems.  Recently developed BEMS 
have been integrated with automatic or manual control systems to prevent anomaly in energy consumption.  
Moreover, several types of BEMS integrated with BIM have been proposed by many researchers.  Since  
3243
Authorized licensed use limited to: Industrial Technology Research Institute. Downloaded on July 22,2025 at 02:36:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

Ock, Issa, and Flood 
 
BIM data can be directly used for developing BEMS, more reliable and accurate evaluation would be 
enabled.  Moreover, BIM data can be used for developing model predictive control (MPC) or simulation 
based control.  Recently, as the capability and accuracy of BIM based simulations have significantly 
improved, developing real-time simulation based BEMS are more attractive.        
With considering current improvements, this study focused on the feasibility of model simulation based 
BEMS development and proposed a conceptual framework for smart BEMS.  The proposed advanced 
BEMS are limited to the features of lighting energy control and cooling and heating energy consumption.  
For lighting energy control, a daylighting intensity database is pre-constructed, and the data can be used to 
detect the space where artificial lighting can be turned off if transmitted daylighting intensity is higher than 
lighting brightness.  In addition, in order to optimally control heating and cooling energy use, occupants’ 
behaviors are included for developing advanced BEMS.  In this study the occupants’ uncertainty is 
considered as the desire of opening windows.  If opened windows are detected by installed sensors, the 
opened room BIM data and real-time weather data are transferred to CFD simulation to create a new 
boundary condition.  Newly created boundary conditions would be used for analyzing thermal performance 
of selected room; and the result from the CFD simulation can be compared with reference model to adjust 
room temperature.  
REFERENCES 
Dong, B., et al. (2014). "A BIM-enabled information infrastructure for building energy Fault Detection and 
Diagnostics." Automation in Construction 44: 197-211. 
Guardo, A., et al. (2011). "CFD assessment of the performance of lateral ventilation in Double Glazed 
Façades in Mediterranean climates." Energy and Buildings 43(9): 2539-2547. 
Heo, Y., et al. (2015). "Scalable methodology for large scale building energy improvement: Relevance of 
calibration in model-based retrofit analysis." Building and Environment 87: 342-350. 
Kang, S. J., et al. (2014). "Scheduling-based real time energy flow control strategy for building energy 
management system." Energy and Buildings 75: 239-248. 
Kim, Y.-M., et al. (2011). "Effects of double skin envelopes on natural ventilation and heating loads in 
office buildings." Energy and Buildings 43(9): 2118-2126. 
Kolokotsa, D., et al. (2009). "Predictive control techniques for energy and indoor environmental quality 
management in buildings." Building and Environment 44(9): 1850-1863. 
Mills, E. (2011). "Building commissioning: a golden opportunity for reducing energy costs and greenhouse 
gas emissions in the United States." Energy Efficiency 4(2): 145-173. 
Mingotti, N., et al. (2011). "The fluid mechanics of the natural ventilation of a narrow-cavity double-skin 
facade." Building and Environment 46(4): 807-823. 
Moon, H. and M. S. Choi (2014). Application of a BIM-based Data Model for the Evaluation of Real-time 
Building Energy Performance in the Operational Stage. IBPSA Asia Conference. Nagoya, Japan. 
O'Donnell, J., et al. (2013). "Transforming BIM to BEM: Generation of Building Geometry for the NASA 
Ames Sustainability Base BIM." Ernest Orlando Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory LBNL-
6033E. 
O'Neill, Z., et al. (2014). "Model-based real-time whole building energy performance monitoring and 
diagnostics." Journal of Building Performance Simulation 7(2): 83-99. 
Oldewurtel, F., et al. (2012). "Use of model predictive control and weather forecasts for energy efficient 
building climate control." Energy and Buildings 45(0): 15-27. 
Prívara, S., et al. (2011). "Model predictive control of a building heating system: The first experience." 
Energy and Buildings 43(2–3): 564-572. 
Radosavljevic, J., et al. (2014). "Estimation of Indoor Temperature for a Direct-Gain Passive Solar 
Building." Journal of Energy Engineering 140(1): 04013007. 
Ray, S. D., et al. (2014). "Experimental characterization of full-scale naturally ventilated atrium and 
validation of CFD simulations." Energy and Buildings 69(0): 285-291. 
3244
Authorized licensed use limited to: Industrial Technology Research Institute. Downloaded on July 22,2025 at 02:36:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

Ock, Issa, and Flood 
 
Reinhart, C. and P.-F. Breton (2009). "Experimental validation of Autodesk 3Ds Mas Design 2009 and 
Daysim 3.0." NRC Project #B3241. 
Ryan, E. M. and T. F. Sanquist (2012). "Validation of building energy modeling tools under idealized and 
realistic conditions." Energy and Buildings 47: 375-382. 
Široký, J., et al. (2011). "Experimental analysis of model predictive control for an energy efficient building 
heating system." Applied Energy 88(9): 3079-3087. 
U.S. Department of Energy (2012). 2011 Buildings Energy Data Book. U.S. Deparment of Energy. 
Wong, S. L., et al. (2010). "Artificial neural networks for energy analysis of office buildings with 
daylighting." Applied Energy 87(2): 551-557. 
AUTHOR BIOGRAPHIES 
JINTAEK OCK is a Ph.D. candidate in the Rinker School of Construction Management at the University 
of Florida. His research interests are building information modeling (BIM), environmental performance 
analysis and energy simulation. He holds a Master’s degree in building construction. His email address is 
okjihad@ufl.edu. 
 
RAJA RAYMOND ISSA is a Holland Professor and Director of the Center for Advanced Construction 
Information Modeling in the Rinker School of Construction Management at the University of Florida. He 
has over 30 years of industry and academic experience in computer science and construction engineering 
and management. He received a B.S., M.S. and Ph.D. in Civil Engineering from Mississippi State 
University and a JD from the University of Memphis where he also did post-graduate work in computer 
science. His areas of research include construction law, information systems and advanced construction 
information modeling. His email is raymond-issa@ufl.edu. 
 
IAN FLOOD is Holland Professor in the Rinker School of Construction Management at the University of 
Florida. He received his Ph.D. from the University of Manchester, UK, on parallel computing techniques 
applied to the simulation of construction processes. He has published over 140 refereed articles on the 
subjects of simulation modeling and intelligent computing applied to civil engineering.  His email is 
flood@ufl.edu.     
3245
Authorized licensed use limited to: Industrial Technology Research Institute. Downloaded on July 22,2025 at 02:36:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.